The financial trojan TrickBot has been updating its campaigns and targets since F5 malware researchers started following it in September 2016.
This is expected behavior because attackers need to continually update their targets and methods to evade detection.
Previously, TrickBot, the successor to Dyre, targeted financial institutions in Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
TrickBot’s May 2017 campaigns targeted banks in the UK, Australia, US, Canada, New Zealand, Ireland, France, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Bulgaria, India, Singapore, and Hong Kong.
In the 26 TrickBot configurations F5 researchers analyzed that were active in May 2017, targets expanded beyond banks to include two payment processing providers and two Customer Relationship Management (CRM) SaaS providers.
The fact that payment processors were targets was a notable change that we also observed in Marcher, an Android banking trojan in March of 2017.
It appears now that CRMs are a new target of attackers; is it because of their potential for collecting valuable user data that could enhance phishing campaigns?
What’s also notable (and expected) is that all command and control (C&C) servers tied to the most recent campaigns reside within web hosting provider networks and were communicating with their infected hosts over port 443.
We know attackers hide their exploits in encrypted traffic; this is just another point of reference to prove it is a consistent and common method being used.
Additionally, none of the C&Cs we observed in May 2017 were the same C&Cs we tracked in late 2016.
The larger campaign detected included 257 URLs for banks in the UK, Australia, US, Canada, Ireland, France, Germany, Switzerland, Hong Kong, the Netherlands, and Bulgaria.
The same US payment processor was targeted across both campaigns, however, the CRM targets only appeared in the second campaign.
Figure 1: Smaller campaign and larger campaign with count of URL targets
When looking at TrickBot’s URL targets, we attributed the country target based on the country code in the URL rather than the global headquarters of the targeted business.
For instance, https://www.citibank.com.sg is attributed to Singapore, and https://online.citi.eu/GBIPB is attributed to the UK, even though CitiBank is headquartered in the US.
(Refer to Appendix A for specific targets by country.)
The smaller campaign focused on targeting banks (83% of URL targets) in Australia, UK, Canada, New Zealand and Singapore, and a payment processor (PayPal) attributed to the US (although PayPal users are global).
Figure 2: URL targets by industry in the smaller campaign
The map in Figure 3 shows the number of URLs targeted by country in the smaller campaign.
All targets in every country except the US were banks.
No US banks were targeted in this campaign, only the payment processor, PayPal.
The 35 unique PayPal URLs targeted were the exact same URLs targeted in both campaigns.
Figure 3: Targeted Countries in the smaller campaign
Figure 4 shows unique URLs targeted in comparison to unique businesses, because there were often multiple URL targets within one business.
(For additional details on the businesses targeted by industry and country, see Appendix A.)
Figure 4 shows unique URLs targeted in comparison to unique businesses, because there were often multiple URL targets within one business.
(For additional details on the businesses targeted by industry and country, see Appendix A.)
Figure 4: Unique URLs to unique businesses in the smaller campaign

The larger campaign expanded its scope of targeted banking URLs and payment processors by adding one new payment processor URL in the UK and introducing CRMs as new targets.
The specific CRMs targeted were Salesforce.com and an auto sales CRM developed by Reynolds & Reynolds in the US.
Figure 5: URL targets by industry in the larger campaign
The larger campaign was mainly focused on banks in the UK (47% of targets, up from 18% in the smaller campaign), followed by Australia, then the US.
All Australian targets were banks again.
PayPal was the leading US target (exactly the same PayPal URLs in both campaigns), followed by 9 other US banks that were not targeted in the smaller campaign, and with the addition of new CRM providers.
Additional European companies were targeted in the larger campaign, including banks in France, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and Bulgaria.
A bank in Hong Kong was the new Asia target in this campaign, however, the banking targets in Singapore and India from the smaller campaign were not included.
Figure 6: Targeted countries in the larger campaign
The chart below shows the same data as that shown in Figure 4 for the larger campaign.
(For details, see Appendix A.)
Figure 7: Unique URLs to unique businesses in the larger campaign
When analyzing the two campaigns, six C&C IP addresses were identified, all of which exist within European web hosting provider networks.
As shown in the table below, three of the six are operated by hosting firms in Asia that use these European web hosting companies’ services.
All of them used port 443 / HTTPS as a connection method from the infected machine back to the C&C host, a method commonly used by malware authors to evade detection from network security devices that don’t inspect encrypted traffic.
The following MD5 samples, active in May 2017, were analyzed for this report:
It seems the success of TrickBot thus far has influenced the authors to not only repeat their previous target list of banks from previous campaigns but to expand those targets to include new banks globally as well as CRM providers.
The fact that C&C servers in these two most recent campaigns reside within web hosting companies is also significant, along with the fact that the C&C servers were different from those used in previous campaigns.
Given the changes we’ve witnessed with each successive campaign, F5 Labs researchers expect to see further evolution in both the targets and methods used by TrickBot authors, and we will continue to monitor and report on this evolving threat.
TrickBot’s consistent initial attack pattern is to use email spam campaigns, so users are advised not to open suspicious files received by email.
The following list shows the actual banks targeted by country, and the number of unique URLs per bank as an indication of their importance to the malware authors.
Payment Processor Targets by Country
The information you provide will be treated in accordance with the F5 Privacy Notice.
Need to change your email or add a new one?
Sara Boddy is a Senior Director overseeing F5 Labs and Communities.
She came to F5 from Demand Media where she was the Vice President of Information Security and Business Intelligence.
Sara ran the security team at Demand Media for 6 years; prior to Demand Media, she held various roles in the information security community over 11 years at Network Computing Architects and Conjungi Networks.
Jesse Smith is a contributing researcher and author for F5 Labs.
Working at F5 for 5 years, Doron handles and analyzes cyber threat investigations for most of the major banking malware families in recent years.
Doron holds a Bachelor of Science focused in Computer Science.
So, we get to work.
We obsess over effective attack methods.
We monitor the growth of IoT and its evolving threats.
We dive deep into the latest crypto-mining campaigns.
We analyze banking Trojan targets.
We hunt for the latest malware.
And then our team of experts share it all with you.
For more than 20 years, F5 has been leading the app delivery space.
With our experience, we are passionate about educating the security community-providing the intel you need to stay informed so your apps can stay safe.
So, we get to work.
We obsess over effective attack methods.
We monitor the growth of IoT and its evolving threats.
We dive deep into the latest crypto-mining campaigns.
We analyze banking Trojan targets.
We hunt for the latest malware.
And then our team of experts share it all with you.
For more than 20 years, F5 has been leading the app delivery space.
With our experience, we are passionate about educating the security community-providing the intel you need to stay informed so your apps can stay safe.
The information you provide will be treated in accordance with the F5 Privacy Notice.
Need to change your email or add a new one?
The information you provide will be treated in accordance with the F5 Privacy Notice.
