Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
In new spear-phishing campaigns observed this month, the Cobalt hacking group targeted banks in Russia and Romania with emails containing two payloads pointing to two different command and control servers.
Cobalt is a cybercrime gang that operates since at least 2016 specialized in targeting financial organizations.
According to data from Europol, the group is tied to cyberattacks against at least 100 banks across the world, stealing about one billion euros from them.
Although the alleged ringleader has been arrested in Spain this year, and three individuals believed to be members of the hacking crew have been charged at the beginning of the month, the group continues to operate.
Arbor Networks ASERT Team on August 13 noticed a new campaign bearing the Cobalt signature.
The target was NS Bank in Russia.
ASERT's threat-intelligence partner Intel471 discovered another campaign aimed at Carpatica Commercial Bank/Patria Bank in Romania.
The emails delivered to the victims purported to be from other institutions related to the financial industry, a tactic intended to increase confidence in launching the weaponized files in the attachment.
The researchers with ASERT examined the domain rietumu[.
]me, which is a command and control (C2) server connected to Cobalt activity, and found an email address that led them to five new domains created on August 1, one of them being inter-kassa[.
The other domains the experts uncovered, and clearly trying to impersonate financial institutions are:
Interkassa is a legitimate payment processing system based in Georgia (the country) offering over 50 payment instruments for online transactions in multiple currencies.
Looking for samples associated with this domain, ASERT found a phishing email for an NS Bank employee.
Contrary to the "norm," it included two links to malicious files: one to a Word document with obfuscated VBA scripts, and one for downloading a binary with the extension changed to JPG.
The weaponized Office file needs to have permission to run macros in order to be able to execute the VBA script.
But if macros are enabled, a convoluted operation is triggered, ending with downloading and running a JavaScript backdoor very similar in functionality with another tool linked to the Cobalt group.
The executable file posing as JPEG image in the email to NS Bank came from hxxp://sepa-europa[.
]eu, a domain pretending to be related to the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), an initiative for easier cross-border payments within the European Union space.
"UPX unpacked, is an executable rather than an image file.
The sample is littered with junk code that spends CPU cycles before proceeding to de-obfuscate itself.
The unpacking routine involves overwriting itself in memory with another executable," ASERT explains.
Following the analysis of this binary, the researchers determined it was a variant of CobInt/COOLPANTS - a reconnaissance backdoor found on a C2 operated by Cobalt hackers in the past.
"Making use of separate infection points in one email with two separate C2s makes this email peculiar.
One could speculate that this would increase the infection odds," ASERT concludes.
The spear-phishing campaign against Carpatica Commercial Bank, now merged with Patria Bank, delivered malware that shared the same program database with a sample from the domain rietumul[.
]me, tied to the Cobalt group.
The header of the phishing email shows that the attacker used SEPA once more as a cover for the malicious activity, using SEPA Europe as the sender of the message.
It is unclear when Intel471 caught the phishing email, but two weeks ago the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) announced that it had solid information about cyberattacks aimed at financial institutions in Romania.
According to the communication, the events occurred between June and August, a timeframe that overlaps with the campaigns discovered by the researchers at the two companies.
SRI says that analysis from its cyberintelligence unit, National Cyberint Center (CNC), shows that the arsenal of attack tools used by the hackers includes Cobalt Strike, a piece of software for penetration testing.
This is confirmed by the numerous reports from various security companies that examined the group's activity.
Spear-phishing is an initial stage of the attack, where the group tries to gain a foothold access in the bank's digital infrastructure.
Subsequent activity from the Cobalt group typically consists in reconnaissance and moving laterally inside the network.
After they learn how the target operates and get the same access as high-level employees, the hackers could execute money transfers, command ATMs, and steal money from payment gateways and SWIFT systems.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
