Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
Proofpoint researchers discovered two new modular downloaders this summer: Marap [1] and AdvisorsBot [2], both of which were noteworthy for their small footprints, stealthy infections, and apparent focus on reconnaissance.
We have also observed an actor commonly known as Cobalt Gang (or Group) using another new downloader that shares many of these characteristics since early 2018.
Group-IB named this malware “CobInt” and released a report on its use by Cobalt Gang in May [3].
While we noticed that Cobalt Gang appeared to stop using CobInt as a first-stage downloader around the time researchers at Group-IB published their findings, they have since returned to using the downloader as of July.
Arbor Networks also recently released a blog post detailing some of the renewed CobInt activity [4].
In this post, we describe recent activity that we have observed and analyze the multi-stage CobInt malware in detail.
On August 2, 2018, we observed messages with the subject “Подозрение на мошенничество” (Translated from Russian: “Suspicion of fraud”) purporting to be from “Interkassa” using a sender email address with a lookalike domain “denis[@]inter-kassa[.]com”.
The messages contained two URLs.
The first linked to a macro document that ultimately installed the More_eggs downloader [5], while the second linked directly to the CobInt stage 1 executable.
This campaign was also detailed in Arbor’s report [4].
On August 14, 2018, we observed messages spoofing the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) with lookalike sender domains sepa-europa[.
]info and subjects such as “notification”, “letter”, “message”, and “notice”.
The messages (Figure 1) contained:
Figure 1: Example message from August 14
On August 16, 2018, we observed messages purporting to be from Alfa Bank using a lookalike domain aifabank[.
]com and subjects such as “Fraud Control”, “Фрауд” (Translates to “Fraud”), “Предотвращение хищения” (Translates to “Prevention of theft“), and “Блокирование транзакций” (Translates to “Transaction Blocking”).
The messages (Figure 2) contain URLs linking to a hosted ThreadKit exploit document that would exploit CVE-2017-8570, CVE-2017-11882, or CVE-2018-0802, to execute the embedded CobInt Stage 1.
Figure 2: Example message from August 16, with stolen branding
On September 4, 2018, we observed messages purporting to be from Raiffeisen Bank using lookalike sender domains ralffeisen[.
]com and subjects such as “Fraudulent transaction”, “Wire Transfer Fraud”, and “Request for data”.
The messages (Figure 3) contained a Microsoft Word attachment that used a relationship object to download an external VBscript file containing an exploit for CVE-2018-8174 leading to the execution of CobInt stage 1.
Figure 3: Example message from the September 4 campaign
CobInt is a downloader malware written in C. Its name is based on the association of the malware with the “Cobalt Group” threat actor and an internal DLL name of “int.dll” used in some of the samples.
The malware can be broken up into three stages: an initial downloader that downloads the main component, the main component itself, and various additional modules.
The first stage is a basic downloader with the purpose of downloading the main CobInt component.
As with other downloaders we have examined recently, its functionality is disguised by the use of Windows API function hashing (an implementation of the hashing algorithm in Python is available on Github [7]).
The command and control (C&C) host and URI are stored as encrypted strings.
The encryption algorithm is a basic XOR with a 4-byte key that changes from sample to sample (an IDA Pro Python script that extracts and decrypts the strings from a memory dump is available on Github [8]).
In the analyzed sample (from August 14) the C&C host and URI were “rietumu[.
The next stage is downloaded via HTTPS and an example of request and response data is shown in Figures 4 and 5.
Figure 4: Stage 1 HTTPS request
Figure 5: Stage 1 HTTPS response data
The response data is encrypted using three layers (a Python script that decrypts the response is available on Github [9]):
The decrypted data contains a DLL, which is CobInt’s main component.
Stage 1 finishes by loading and executing the DLL.
The main component downloads and executes various modules from its C&C.
C&C hosts are stored in a 64-byte chunk of encrypted data.
They can be decrypted by XORing with a 64-byte XOR key (an IDA Pro Python script that can extract and decrypt the hosts from a memory dump is available on Github [10]).
C&C hosts are pipe delimited, but at the time of publication we have not seen more than one host specified in the encrypted text.
In the analyzed sample, the C&C host was the same as the stage 1 C&C: rietumu[.
The malware uses HTTPS to communicate with the C&C server.
An example command poll request is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Stage 2 HTTPS command poll request
The C&C URI is similar to the stage 1 URI, but instead of being hardcoded, the URI is generated for each request.
The URI generation encodes information that is likely used as a “bot ID” to identify the victim:
Figure 7: Hash function used in various parts of stage 2
An example of response data is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Stage 2 HTTPS response data
The response is meant to look like an HTML file by including various HTML tags (a creative way to potentially make analysts and tools overlook it), but, in fact, contains encrypted data.
It can be decrypted using the following process (Python scripts that perform the decryption are available on Github [11]):
A decrypted response contains the following structure:
We have identified four commands that may be sent to the malware from the C&C:
Command 1 above implements the main functionality of CobInt: to download and execute additional modules.
The data for this command is organized in the following binary structure:
Modules are loaded as shellcode and begin executing at the indicated entry point.
The code at the entry point XOR decrypts itself with a 4-byte XOR key that changes from module to module (see Figure 8).
Once decrypted, the module turns into a DLL.
Figure 9: Example of module decrypting itself into a DLL
When the module DLL is executed, an “operations” function is also passed to it from the main component that defines two operations:
Module responses and error messages are queued up and sent to the C&C server during the next command poll request.
If there are any messages to be sent during the command poll, the HTTPS request is switched from GET to POST and the message is included as POST data.
Message data is formatted in the following binary structure:
The message is encrypted in 3 layers:
At the time of publication we have observed two modules being sent from a C&C server, whose function was to:
We assume then that, following the reconnaissance actions above, threat actors would deploy additional modules to infected systems of interest.
As defenses improve across the board, threat actors must innovate to improve the returns on their investments in malware and infection vectors, making this approach consistent with the “follow the money” theme we have associated with a range of financially motivated campaigns over the years.
This appears to be the latest trend as threat actors look to increase their effectiveness and differentiate final payloads based on user profiles.
Download URL to Macro Document (August 2)
Download URL to CobInt Stage 1 (August 2)
Download URL to CobInt Stage 1 (August 2)
CobInt Stage 1 (August 2)
CobInt Stage 1 Download URL (August 14)
CobInt Stage 1 Download URL (August 14)
CobInt Stage 1 Download URL (August 14)
CobInt Stage 1 (August 14)
CobInt Stage 2 (August 14)
Decrypted Screenshot Module (August 14)
Decrypted Get Process Names Module (September 4)
Download URL to ThreadKit Document (August 16)
CobInt Stage 1 (August 16)
Download URL to CVE-2018-8174 VBS (September 4)
ET and ETPRO Suricata/Snort Signatures
2832437 || ETPRO TROJAN Observed Malicious SSL Cert (cobint Downloader)
2832171 || ETPRO TROJAN Observed Malicious SSL Cert (cobint Module CnC)
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
