Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Based on files uploaded to the VirusTotal scanning service, the ransomware attack on the City of New Orleans was likely done by the Ryuk Ransomware threat actors.
On December 14th, 2019, one day after the City of New Orleans ransomware attack, what appear to be memory dumps of suspicious executables were uploaded from an IP address from the USA to the VirusTotal scanning service.
One of these memory dumps, which contained numerous references to New Orleans and Ryuk, was later found by Colin Cowie of Red Flare Security and shared with BleepingComputer.com.
As memory dumps are a snapshot of the memory being used by an application while it is running, it can be used to extract useful strings, file names, commands, and other information that the executable interacted with or executed.
This allows memory dumps to be used during cyber attack forensic investigations to learn more about how the attack was conducted.
The memory dump found by Cowie is for an executable named 'yoletby.exe' and contains numerous references to the City of New Orleans including domain names, domain controllers, internal IP addresses, user names, file shares, and references to the Ryuk ransomware.
The Ryuk ransomware strings included in the dump were the HERMES file marker, file names ending with the .ryk extension, and references to the created RyukReadMe.html ransom notes.
After investigating the file further, BleepingComputer found an interesting reference to the C:\Temp\v2.exe executable that was executed on the machine.
It turns out that a memory dump for this file was also uploaded to VirusTotal.
Of particular interest in the v2.exe memory dump is a string that refers to the New Orleans City Hall.
After further digging around, BleepingComputer was able to find a v2.exe executable, and after executing it, was able to confirm that it was the Ryuk ransomware.
While it is not known if this executable is the one used in the City of New Orleans attack, it does show that this filename is used in Ryuk attacks and the memory dumps show that a file of that name was used on an attack against the City of New Orleans.
If the City of New Orleans was indeed encrypted by Ryuk, which by the evidence seems likely, then this is just another victim of Ryuk who has seen increased activity lately.
BleepingComputer has contacted the City of New Orleans for confirmation that they were infected with Ryuk, but have not heard back at this time.
If New Orleans was encrypted by Ryuk, there is also a very high chance that the Emotet and TrickBot infections are present on the network as well
Emotet is a malware infection that is commonly spread through spam emails that contain malicious attachments.
When opened and macros enabled, these attachments will install the Emotet Trojan on the victim's computer.
Emotet will then use that infected computer to spam other computers with malicious attachments and also download further malware on the computer.
One of the most common malware installed by Emotet is the TrickBot information-stealing Trojan.
When executed, TrickBot will connect back to a command and control server where it will receive commands to load various modules that steal information from the computer or install even further malware.
After the TrickBot actors collect all valuable information and data from the computer, it will then open a reverse shell back to the Ryuk actors.
From there, the Ryuk team will perform reconnaissance of the network, collect admin passwords, take over domain controllers, and utilize post-exploitation toolkits such as PowerShell Empire.
This is why all network admins need to realize that if they have been encrypted by Ryuk, there has commonly been a malware presence on their network for quite a while and that other data may have been stolen or compromised.
It means that in addition to the Ryuk Ransomware infection, they also have to deal with the fact that attackers have been snooping around their data for some time.
The city will need to be more diligent against targeted phishing attacks, tighten security on their network, and change passwords.
Also, as it is unknown what financial information may have been attained by the attackers, the City of New Orleans should contact their banking partners and put new procedures in place regarding how money is transferred.
Update 12/15/19: Updated article to include how Emotet and Trickbot are usually found with Ryuk infections.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Hello i want to know if this is actually caused by Ryuk or also how did you even analyze it ?
Also those dumps you used to analyze belongs to the victim computer of new oreleans ?
Files uploaded to VirusTotal are shared with all users unless they are marked private by the uploader.
This allows many security researchers to download and analyze actual malware in the wild.
Many times these uploads contain indications of their origin.
The ones in the article appear to contain domain information that indicate the origin of the files was New Orleans.
Yes, the memory dumps clearly indicate that the processes were running on the City of New Orleans domain
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
