Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
A new version of the Ryuk Stealer malware has been enhanced to allow it to steal a greater amount of confidential files related to the military, government, financial statements, banking, and other sensitive data.
In September 2019, we reported on a new malware that included references to the Ryuk Ransomware and was used to steal files if the file's name matched certain keywords.
It is not known if this tool is created by the Ryuk Ransomware actors to be used for data exfiltration before encrypting a victim's computer or if another actor simply borrowed from the ransomware's code.
"It is likely the same actor with the access to the earlier Ryuk version who repurposed the code portion for this stealer," Head of SentinelLabs Vitali Kremez told BleepingComputer.
What we do know is that the malware is targeting very specific keywords that could be disastrous for governments, military operations, and law enforcement cases if the stolen files are exposed.
A new variant of the Ryuk Stealer malware was discovered today by MalwareHunterTeam that adds a new file content scanning feature and additional keywords that it targets for theft.
In the previous version, the Ryuk Stealer would scan a computer's files for Word (docx) and Excel (xlsx) documents.
According to Kremez, this new version of the stealer will look for an additional seven file types related to C++ source code, further Word and Excel document types, PDFs, JPG image files, and cryptocurrency wallets.
The full list of targeted extensions are:
If a file matches one of the above extensions, the stealer will check the contents of the file and see if they contain one of the 85 keywords listed below.
In addition, the stealer will check if the filename contains any of the following 55 keywords:
When a matching document is found, the malware will upload it to an FTP site that is under the attacker's control.
The two embedded FTP sites currently being used by the malware are down.
As you can see, the targeted keywords are related to sensitive subjects for a variety of data categories such as:
The names in the Personal category are taken from the United States Social Security Department's list of top baby names.
Some of the new search words that were added since the latest version include 'treason', 'NATO', 'convict', 'traitor', 'embeddedspy', 'cyber', 'submarine', 'Submarinesecret', 'contraband', 'radio', 'suspect', 'operation', and 'bribery.'
Based on the targeted keywords in this malware, it looks like the attackers are looking for confidential information to sell to foreign adversaries, corporations, or to be used as blackmail.
At this time, we do not know how this malware is being distributed and if its bundled with ransomware attacks or used independently.
With data exfiltration becoming more common and increasingly being used by ransomware, it is important to make sure you have good security measures in place to protect your network from compromise.
This includes being careful of phishing emails with malicious attachments, do not make Remote Desktop Services publicly accessible, make sure all software and operating systems are updated, and make sure to use security software and good password policies.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Vidar stealer abuses Mastodon to silently get C2 configuration
New UEFI bootkit used to backdoor Windows devices since 2012
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
