Simplify your procurement process and subscribe to Splunk Cloud via the AWS marketplace
Unlock the secrets of machine data with our new guide
Several weeks ago, my good friend Katie Nickels (Director of Intelligence at Red Canary extraordinaire) and I were chatting about Ransomware.
She was super interested and passionate about some new uses of a ransomware variant named “Ryuk” (first detected in 2018 and named after a manga/anime character) [1].
I was, to be honest, much less interested.
It turns out, as usual, Katie was right; this was a big deal (although as you will see, I’m right too… still dull stuff!
This announcement was, perhaps not surprisingly, not accurate.
Over the last couple of months, Ryuk has been ravaging public institutions like hospitals and city governments, causing delays in surgeries and possibly causing actual deaths [2] [3].
Suppose you are interested in the attribution of the Ryuk operators or a deep dive into the malware?
In that case, I recommend you read some of the great blogs/postings from Mandiant or Red Canary on the subject.
Otherwise, buckle up for discussion on some resources to help detect and even possibly remediate Ryuk using Splunk!
Although Ryuk is getting the headlines, what I find most interesting about Ryuk is that it is actually the final step of a multi-staged attack.
Historically Ryuk was delivered with a spearphishing attack using a weaponized Microsoft Word document to drop Emotet or Trickbot trojans.
The malware would be installed and used to survey a network, steal creds, move laterally, and gain footholds on critical servers like domain controllers to modify GPO settings.
All of this amounts to a type of reconnaissance to find the most vital “crown jewels” of the company that are ripe for ransom.
The most recent behavior has shown actors sending google documents with embedded links asking the user to click on the URL, which then delivers a newish-trojan named Bazar or even Cobalt Strike.
Then, using Bazar’s capabilities, the actors perform the same reconnaissance and establishment of footholds.
The outcome of either of these initial vectors is the use of Ryuk ransomware to encrypt files and demand a payout via “RyukReadMe.txt” (which was the genesis of the Ryuk name).
So what’s new, fascinating, or different about Ryuk versus other ransomware?
To be honest... not much.
The reason it’s hitting the news is that they are targeting healthcare facilities amid a global pandemic.
Suppose I had to pick one thing out of the mix of Ryuk/Bazar/Trickbot TTPs to stay awake about?
THAT “human touch” has been what has made it so maddeningly effective and dangerous.
Usually, this blog post section is filled with fun TTPs pulled from the zero-day or possibly a breakdown of a new malware variant.
But, after reviewing the last six years of content that Splunk has created, I am proud to say that we already have you covered.
In my list of detections below, you will notice that I did not break out IOCs.
As David Bianco has pyramidized in the past, IOCs are ephemeral and change often!
I recommend working with a threat intel provider for any low-level IOCs like hashes or IPs.
Throw them into a Lookup table or ES threat intel framework, and off you go!
If you don’t have a threat intel provider, start skimming Twitter for some tremendous open-source lists.
In case you are unaware (or living under a rock for the last two years), Splunk Security Essentials is one of the key places to get Splunk’s security content.
When you boot up the app, navigate to “security content,” and search for Ransomware, you get a plethora of content!
On top of that, I took the MITRE ATT&CK Techniques from the CISA alert and selected the SSE detection content that mapped to them.
It turns out we have over 45 searches to detect Ryuk and trojans like Bazar, Trickbot, or Emotet.
I bet you would love to get this information, wouldn’t you… Well, you can either download this 825 page PDF OR copy the JSON blob here of this bookmarked content and upload it into your updated SSE local instance.
As always, try in dev before prod!
Also, some of these searches may need to be modified to detect Ryuk with greater confidence.
Refer to the CISA alert or the excellent work from Red Canary if you want more atomic TTPs of the malware for integration into your signatures.
Now, of course, this is not the only content that Splunk has created around Ransomware.
In addition, take a peek at Rod Soto’s blog for some examples of where our Security Research team is developing explicit Ryuk content.
Whitepaper
- Splunk Security: Detecting Unknown Malware and Ransomware
Splunk Phantom Resources
- Automate Your Response to WannaCry Ransomware (Blog)
- Playbook: Detect, Block, Contain, and Remediate Ransomware (Blog)
Other Ransomware Blogs to Check Out
- Detect Ransomware in Your Data with the Machine Learning Cloud Service 
- Operationalize Ransomware Detections Quickly and Easily with Splunk
As always, Happy Hunting and good luck :-)
If you are much of a MITRE ATT&CK junkie as I am, take a peek at this great Bzar/ Cabolt Strike/ Ryuk ATTACK navigator that Red Canary created!



Also a big shout out to Katie Nickels for reminding me that Ransomware is still kind of a big deal.
