Product DemoRequest a Demo to see how Red Canary helps you shut down attacks.
Analyst ReportNamed a leader in MDR
BlogSharpen your skills with the latest information, security articles, and insights.
Contact UsHow can we help you?
Reach out to our team and we'll get in touch.
Process Injection encompasses a wide array of malicious behaviors that offer adversaries an inconspicuous method of evading defensive controls, elevating their privilege level, or otherwise executing arbitrary code.
It’s so broad that in the next ATT&CK release, MITRE is recategorizing the technique into 11 sub-techniques.
As such, this is the perfect time for an in-depth, technical conversation exploring the ways that adversaries leverage Process Injection, what malicious process injection looks like, and how you can detect it.
See highlight clips from the Process Injection webinar.
02:10 What Red Canary Does
02:48  “Process injection is a way of running arbitrary code in another process’s memory space.” – Adam
03:30 Why Leverage Process Injection
03:50  “It can be a very good way to evade defenders and defensive controls that are focused around specific tools.” – Adam
04:55 Sub-techniques of Process Injection
05:20  “Process injection, which is a fairly broad technique, has been broken out into 11 different sub-techniques which are more specific techniques or ways of actually doing process injection.” – Adam
08:09 “The ability to inject that into another process and then invoking it by spawning a new thread.” – Matt
09:40  “This technique offers an attacker particular flexibility in that it facilitates direct injection into their target.” – Matt
11:15  “In the case of Ramnit, it injects a traditional DLL into a browser process.” – Matt
14:14  “What are the absolute minimum requirements an attacker has imposed in order to successfully carry out the attack technique?” – Matt
18:15  “Since they’re already writing their own position-independent code, there’s no hard requirement that they must write a PE header into the memory space of another process, but a lot of malware does.” – Matt
22:29  “Although it is kind of uncommon, it can be a successful anti-analysis technique because typically analysis is going to start at the entry point of the PE, and this malware is going to get executed before that is reached.” – Erika
23:05  “It’s often spread via malicious Office documents” – Erika
23:23 Observing Malicious TLS Callbacks
23:29  “Within the PE header itself, there is a TLS directory which contains information about TLS data objects.
These thread local storage objects basically allow each thread to have its own static data area for custom variables, or custom thread initialization routines that they want to employ.” – Erika
28:29 Detecting Malicious TLS Callbacks
29:22  “We talked about some of the APIs that are used by this technique, you can obviously detect the usage of those, but the usage of any one of those by itself is not going to indicate malicious activity.” – Erika
31:00 “It allows an attacker to carve out the executable section of a legitimate or benign process and replace it with their own payload.” – David
33:42 Process Hollowing: Generalized Technique
36:05  “Once the attacker has obtained the PE address, the third step is to perform the hollowing itself.” – David
42:32  “What’s interesting for us as technical defenders is that we use a number of varied techniques taking shape.” – David
45:30  “They create a section that describes their unpacked code.
This is created within the originator process, meaning within the malware process itself.
They create a new section that describes the unpacked code to inject or make resident within the hollowed process.” – David
51:12  “It’s difficult to get a robust detection at scale.” – David
57:09  “We only had these three Linux-only techniques in ATT&CK today.” – Adam
57:38  “Injection isn’t seen in malware on the Mac platform, and there are a few reasons for that.
The most prevalent being that it is much harder than getting the user to click on something and type in their password.” – Erika
1:01:02  “There is no specific mitigation against all forms of process injection.” – Matt
We will be following up with questions and answers in a blog post soon.
info@redcanary.com
+1 855-977-0686
Privacy Policy
All 2021 Threat Detection Report content is fully available through this website.
If you prefer to download a PDF, just fill out this form and let us know what email to send it to.
Check your inbox, the 2021 Threat Detection Report is headed your way.
