Virginia-based EWA has had systems infected with the Ryuk ransomware.
Electronic Warfare Associates (EWA), a 40-year-old electronics company and a well-known US government contractor, has suffered a ransomware infection, ZDNet has learned.
The infection hit the company last week.
Among the systems that had data encrypted during the incident were the company's web servers.
Signs of the incident are still visible online.
Encrypted files and ransom notes are still cached in Google search results, even a week after the company took down the impacted web servers.
Security researchers who reviewed the cached files told ZDNet the encrypted files and ransom note are, without a doubt, a sign of an infection with the Ryuk ransomware.
The security researcher who first discovered these files told ZDNet that several EWA websites appear to have been impacted, such as the sites for:
It is unclear at the moment how much of the company's internal network was encrypted during the incident.
Despite visible signs of a ransomware incident on its public websites, EWA has not issued any public statement about the incident.
An EWA spokesperson hung up the phone earlier today when ZDNet reached out for comment about the security breach.
The company is a well-known supplier of electronics equipment to the US government.
On its website, EWA lists the Department of Defense (DOD), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and the Department of Justice (DOJ) as regular customers.
Making matters worse is that Ryuk is not your regular ransomware strain.
This type of ransomware is solely used in targeted attacks on high-profile companies.
It is usually installed on infected networks after a victim is infected with the Emotet/TrickBot trojans, two well-known cybercrime-as-a-service platforms.
The Ryuk gang uses the Emotet/TrickBot-infected machine as entry point and launch pad to scan and spread inside a company's internal network, exfiltrate data, and then deploy their ransomware.
The data exfiltration happens via a Ryuk module called the Ryuk Stealer, which security researchers have been spotting deployed in recent Ryuk attacks.
Coincidentally, the Ryuk Stealer was recently update to target files that may hold government and military-related data, according to a Bleeping Computer report, suggesting a concerted effort on the Ryuk gang's side in targeting government and military entities.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
