 by Security Lab | Jan 28, 2021 | Threat Research
Since 2021-01-20 Hornetsecurity observes a new malspam campaign using a fake flower shop in an elaborate social engineering lure to spread the BazarLoader malware.
The campaign sends invoices from a fake flower shop in hopes that potential victims will manually find the fake flower shop website and download the BazarLoader malware.
BazarLoader1 is a malware loader attributed to a threat actor with a close relation to the TrickBot malware.
The threat actor is tracked under the name Team9 (Cybereason) or UNC1878 (FireEye).
BazarLoader is also aptly named KEGTAP by FireEye, as in a device used to open a beer keg, because it is used to “open” the network of victims for follow up malware in order to move laterally on the network and eventually deploy the Ryuk ransomware.2
We have previously reported on a BazarLoader campaign using an employment termination social engineering lure to spread its malware.3
The observed campaign started on 2021-01-21 and is ongoing.
It uses various subjects referring to an invoice from the Rose World flower shop.
Spoiler: The flower shop isn’t real.
The attached invoice is an elaborate social engineering scam to trick victims into downloaded the BazarLoader malware.
The following analysis outlines each step of BazarLoader’s new elaborate social engineering campaign.
The attack starts with an email.
The email pretends to be an invoice from the Rose World online store, an online flower shop.
Attached to the email is a PDF invoice.
The PDF has no clickable links.
It however features a domain name under the address of the supposed invoicing party.
When the recipient visits this domain a webshop for flowers is presented.
Even though this is a fake shop it features
However, the checkout fails because allegedly there are no available payment methods.
The checkout is the only thing not working on the fake shop.
Thus it is very hard to identify this as a malicious website.
Because the shop looks legit a recipient will likely try to contact the shop owner to clear up the invoice they falsely received.
To do so, they visit the contact us section of the fake shop.
Here is one last indicator that something is not quite right.
The Google Maps frame is in Russian language, while the rest of the webshop pretends to be from the United States of America.
However, a victim will likely continue to the convenient order number entry field.
When the victim enters the order number – in fact any input will suffice – they are redirected via a loading screen.
The loading page is also fake, the content is already loaded under the loading page overlay.
Next, the victim is presented instructions on how to download and execute the malware.
It includes instructions to bypass the malicious file download warning on Google Chrome.
It even includes instructions to bypass Windows security features preventing the file from being executed because it was downloaded from the Internet.
The “Request Form” link will download a malicious document from hxxps[:]//rosedelivery[.
The malicious document pretends to be protected by DocuSign and macros need to be allowed to decrypt it.
The XLM macro code will download the BazarLoader executable from hxxps[:]//www.smowengroup[.
The BazarLoader uses the decentralized Emerald DNS system based on the Emercoin blockchain to establish its C2 communication.
It will download and install the BazarBackdoor1.
This backdoor will be used to move laterally in the victim’s network in order to take over the domain controller.
Eventually the intrusion is monetized by deploying the Ryuk2 ransomware.
The campaign is targeted towards US companies.
We conclude this from the email, PDF, fake webshop, but also from the recipients, which are US companies and/or international companies with a US presence.
The new BazarLoader campaign does not feature malicious indicators in its emails, such as macro documents or clickable URLs.
It rather relies on an elaborate social engineering lure to lead the victim towards finding and downloading the malware themselves rather then directly handing it over.
The amount of manual work required by victims makes this campaign difficult to detect via automated measures.
This is why Hornetsecurity is closely tracking malspam operations by threat actors to quickly engage newly emerging threats.
Hence Hornetsecurity is already aware of this new elaborate social engineering scheme to distribute the BazarBackdoor and Hornetsecurity’s Spam and Malware Protection, already quarantines the new BazarLoader emails.
Representation was condensed by using the following regex patterns: KCD[0-9]{8}G, (Rose Deliver|Rose World)
Representation was condensed by using the following regex patterns: KCD[0-9]{8}G
The brand new Cyberthreat Report tells you all about current cyberthreats and gives you access to exclusive numbers and statistics.

Hornetsecurity Ltd.
55 Baker Street
London
W1U7EU
United Kingdom
I agree to the processing of my data and the establishment of contact by Hornetsecurity in accordance with the data protection guidelines.
We could not locate your form.
We could not locate your form.
We could not locate your form.
We could not locate your form.
We could not locate your form.
