We discuss the cases of BazarCall and IcedID we observed in March.
Both are known for the use of spam to deliver their payloads.
By: Raphael Centeno, Don Ovid Ladores, Lala Manly, Junestherry Salvador, Frankylnn Uy
		
			April 12, 2021
Read time:  ( words)
We observed a spike in BazarCall and IcedID activity in March.
One thing these two campaigns have in common is the use of spam that lead victims into downloading malicious files.
BazarCall takes a more roundabout approach by involving phone calls in its campaigns, while IcedID stole and repurposed real email conversations to make its malicious spam more convincing.
Based on separate reports on BazarCall and IcedID, both have been actively distributed through spam campaigns in March.
This is also reflected in our own findings.
BazarCall was named for its use of phone operators to instruct users into downloading a malicious file that typically leads to the payload BazarLoader.
BazarLoader was discovered in 2020 and is linked to the developers of Trickbot as well as in campaigns involving the well-known Ryuk ransomware.
We saw a surge in its activity in March, with most of its targeted victims residing in the US, followed by Germany and India, based on the number of spam mail containing BazarCall that we have detected.
BazarCall’s routine starts with a spam mail stating that the victim’s free trial period for a service rendered by the fictitious company “Medical Reminder Service” is about to end.
This is the same company name used in the BazarCall campaign that Bleeping Computer reported.
The campaign we have observed largely follows the pattern described in their report.
In the email, the user is directed to call a provided phone number to unsubscribe and avoid being billed monthly charges.
The phone operators will then instruct the user to go to a webpage to unsubscribe.
This page is the malware chain’s download page.
Once the victim enters their subscription number, the site automatically downloads an Excel document that is made to look like a regular form, but it’s actually a malware-embedded file.
The phone operator continues to guide the user into unwittingly enabling macros that will drop a malicious binary in the folder C:\Users\Public.
The embedded malware will first attempt to send the command “ping” to the initial command-and-control (C&C) server where the likely response is the second stage download URL, delivering the final BazarLoader payload.
Unfortunately, at the time of our analysis, we were unable to test any of the C&C servers for live activity.
BazarCall also distinctly makes use of Campo Loader, which appears to be a malware-as-a-service (MaaS), to deliver its final BazarLoader payload.
We continue to monitor developments for BazarCall.
At present, the surge we saw in March seems to have tapered off in April.
Meanwhile, IcedID is a banking trojan first discovered in 2017.
It has been used by the threat group Shathak or TA551 in 2020.
The group used malicious spam that contains a password-protected Word document with malicious macros.
Similar to BazarCall, we saw a spike in IcedID activity last month.
IcedID campaigns are known for using stolen real email conversations on which they attach their malicious files in zip format.
This was the same tactic we observed.
If the attachment is opened it would contain an XLSM file.
This file uses a simple stealth technique — a hidden column containing malicious formulas in white text, making it invisible to the victim unless they unhide and highlight the column.
If the victim runs the macro code, it will download a 64-bit .dll file, which is the IcedID in binary.
Our detections for IcedID show continuing activity going into April but as with BazarCall, these have also decreased in number.
The use of spam is a traditional and staple way of delivering malware.
Attacks that use such methods can resurge whenever threat actors find a way to make their fake instructions and messages more convincing.
Threat actors are also on the lookout for situations where users are especially susceptible to such schemes.
Remote work conditions or the use of timely topics, for example, can make users less vigilant.
These scenarios are exemplified by BazarCall and IcedID.
The use of phone calls and the BazarCall operators’ adoption of a regular company identity has had victims convinced of the bogus service and subscription.
While IcedID’s continued use of stolen conversations allows it to avoid many of the usual indicators of a malicious email.
IcedID has also recently used emails centered on the Covid-19 pandemic to trick its victims.
Users need to be especially wary of the tactics that BazarLoader and IcedID employ as they have also been used to deliver other payloads such as well-known ransomware families.
As mentioned earlier, BazarLoader has already been linked to Ryuk.
IcedID was very recently used to deliver Sodinokibi, and was used in Egregor ransomware attacks.
Here are some of the best practices businesses and users can adopt to defend against threats such as BazarCall and IcedID:
Organizations can benefit from having Trend Micro™ endpoint solutions such as Trend Micro Smart Protection Suites and Worry-Free™ Business Security.
These can protect users and businesses from threats by detecting malicious files and spammed messages as well as blocking all related malicious URLs.
The Trend Micro Deep Discovery™ solution has an email inspection layer that can protect enterprises and users by detecting malicious attachments and URLs.
Trend Micro Email Security delivers continuously updated protection to stop spam, malware, spear phishing, ransomware, and advanced targeted attacks before they reach the network.
It protects Microsoft Exchange, Microsoft Office 365, Google Apps, and other hosted and on-premises email solutions.
Phish Insight provides the most effective phishing simulations and cybersecurity awareness training modules on the market.
Powered by Trend Micro, the Phish Insight team creates a simulation template library based on billions of real phishing samples as well as a fully automated and staggered delivery system that makes the simulation emails even more convincing.
Not only integrating the best and the most prevalent training modules from around the world, Phish Insight also allows users to customize their own training programs.
Phish Insight enhances information security awareness for organizations by empowering people to recognize and protect themselves against the latest cyber threats.
