An official website of the United States government

Official websites use .gov

              A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

              A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website.
Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
A Latvian national was arraigned in federal court in Cleveland, Ohio, today on multiple charges stemming from her alleged role in a transnational cybercrime organization responsible for creating and deploying a computer banking trojan and ransomware suite of malware known as “Trickbot.”
Alla Witte, aka Max, 55, is charged in 19 counts of a 47-count indictment, which accuses her of participating in a criminal organization referred to as the “Trickbot Group,” which deployed the Trickbot malware.
The Trickbot Group operated in Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, and Suriname, and primarily targeted victim computers belonging to businesses, entities, and individuals, including those in the Northern District of Ohio and elsewhere in the United States.
Targets included hospitals, schools, public utilities, and governments.
Witte, who previously resided in Paramaribo, Suriname, was arrested on Feb. 6, in Miami, Florida.
“This indictment demonstrates the broad reach of the Department of Justice’s Ransomware and Digital Extortion Task Force,” said Deputy Attorney General Lisa O. Monaco.
“Trickbot infected millions of victim computers worldwide and was used to harvest banking credentials and deliver ransomware.
The defendant is accused of working with others in the transnational criminal organization to develop and deploy a digital suite of malware tools used to target businesses and individuals all over the world for theft and ransom.
These charges serve as a warning to would-be cybercriminals that the Department of Justice, through the Ransomware and Digital Extortion Task Force and alongside our partners, will use all the tools at our disposal to disrupt the cybercriminal ecosystem.”
“Federal law enforcement, along with assistance provided by international partners, continue to fight and disrupt ransomware and malware where feasible.
We are united in our efforts to hold transnational hackers accountable for their actions.”
“Witte and her associates are accused of infecting tens of millions of computers worldwide, in an effort to steal financial information to ultimately siphon off millions of dollars through compromised computer systems,” said Special Agent in Charge Eric B. Smith of the FBI’s Cleveland Field Office.
“Cyber intrusions and malware infections take significant time, expertise, and investigative effort, but the FBI will ensure these hackers are held accountable, no matter where they reside or how anonymous they think they are.”
Witte and others also allegedly captured login credentials and other stolen personal information to gain access to online bank accounts, execute unauthorized electronic funds transfers and launder the money through U.S. and foreign beneficiary accounts.
According to the indictment, Witte worked as a malware developer for the Trickbot Group and wrote code related to the control, deployment, and payments of ransomware.
The ransomware informed victims that their computer was encrypted, and that they would need to purchase special software through a Bitcoin address controlled by the Trickbot Group to decrypt their files.
In addition, Witte allegedly provided code to the Trickbot Group that monitored and tracked authorized users of the malware and developed tools and protocols to store stolen login credentials.
The defendant was arraigned before U.S. Magistrate Judge William H. Baughman Jr. of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio.
A federal district court judge will determine any sentence after considering the U.S.
Sentencing Guidelines and other statutory factors.
The FBI’s Cleveland Office investigated the case.
Heath of the Criminal Division’s Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section and Assistant U.S.
Attorneys Daniel J. Riedl and Duncan T. Brown of the Northern District of Ohio are prosecuting the case.
This case is part of the Department of Justice’s Ransomware and Digital Extortion Task Force, which was created to combat the growing number of ransomware and digital extortion attacks.
The department, through the Task Force, also strategically targets the ransomware criminal ecosystem as a whole and collaborates with domestic and foreign government agencies as well as private sector partners to combat this significant criminal threat.
An indictment is merely an allegation and the defendant is presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt in a court of law.
