Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
In 2020, Proofpoint observed an increase in BazaLoader campaign volume peaking in October.
During that time, we observed specific campaigns correlated to public reports of affiliate campaigns delivering BazaLoader and associated with Ryuk ransomware infections.
Notably, in January 2021, Proofpoint researchers observed a few of BazaLoader campaigns leveraging Valentine's Day themes such as flowers and lingerie.
The attack chains required an unusual amount of human interaction before a payload was delivered.
While we track a fair amount of BazaLoader delivered by TA800 and TA572, these campaigns are not associated with either TA800 or TA572 and are likely leveraged by other affiliates.
BazaLoader is a downloader written in C++ whose primary function is to download and execute additional modules.
It was first observed in the wild in April 2020 and since has steadily been adopted by more actors.
Proofpoint has observed at least six variants of Bazaloader signaling active and continued development.
One of the earliest BazaLoader variants Proofpoint researchers identified used ".bazar" top-level domains for command-and-control communication.
The ".bazar" TLDs are associated with cryptocurrency DNS named Emercoin using Blockchain services reported in early April 2020.
Today, we do not see the same association to cryptocurrency infrastructure, but it is relevant to its provenance.
Proofpoint researchers have spotted multiple BazaLoader campaigns in January and February 2021 involving the tactic of heavily relying on human interaction with different sites, PDF attachments, and email lures.
There were a range of lure and subject topics, including compact storage devices, office supplies, pharmaceutical supplies, and sports nutrition, but what stuck out were campaigns that were timely and relevant to the upcoming Valentine’s Day holiday.
The campaigns were spread across a diverse set of companies and sectors.
Valentine’s Day, while not abused to the level of other holidays, presents an opportunity for a variety of actors.
The FBI Boston field office has posted public warnings of romance scams.
While this is not a romance scam, it is an example of social engineering well-timed with the Valentine’s Day holiday.
The infection chain is consistent in the latest campaigns.
The websites the user would browse to are fake, but the actors took care to have the physical addresses in the below images match a near-legitimate location.
For example, Ajour Lingerie is not located at 1133 50th St, Brooklyn, NY 11219, but this address is in physical proximity to a legitimate website and physical business called the Lingerie Shop.
Figure 2: physical address to digital website
This campaign delivered PDF attachments that references a specific customer order number and associated purchased items which entices the recipient to go to the Ajour Lingerie website.
If the user visits the website and navigates to the "Contact Us" page, they are then given the option to enter the order number in the order ID.
If entered, the contact page then redirects the user to the landing page that links to and explains how to open the Excel sheet.
The Excel sheet contains macros that, if enabled by the user, will download BazaLoader.
Figure 6: Enable Content to deliver BazaLoader
This campaign is nearly identical—enticing users to check an order number.
The campaign delivered PDF attachments with references to purchases at the Rose World website.
If the user visits the website, navigates to "Contact Us", and enters the order number in the order ID, the site will redirect the user to a landing page.
This landing page links to and explains how to open the Excel sheet.
The Excel sheet contains macros that, if enabled, will download BazaLoader.
Figure 7: Rose World Customer Order Email
Figure 8: Invoice with website
Figure 9: Rose World contact page and enter your order number
Figure 10: Enable Macros to receive Bazaloader
Proofpoint researchers have observed a steady growth in actors using BazaLoader as a 1st stage downloader.
In addition to the uptick in BazaLoader distribution, there is active development of BazaLoader, particularly during the month of October 2020.
These recent BazaLoader campaigns exemplify affiliate actors leveraging a loader that is increasingly popular and more reliant on human interaction.
Further, the social engineering features rely on the timeliness of the Valentine’s Day holiday and the intrinsic user curiosity to see what they may have ordered.
From a technical point of view, we have provided a number of IOCs and ET signatures below as this malware family is used to execute on any number of actor or affiliate intentions, actions, and objectives.
ETPRO TROJAN bazaloader Variant CnC Activity
ETPRO TROJAN bazaloader Variant CnC Activity
ETPRO TROJAN bazaloader Variant CnC Activity
ETPRO TROJAN bazaBackdoor Variant CnC (Checkin)
ETPRO TROJAN Possible bazaloader CnC Activity M3
ETPRO TROJAN Possible bazaloader CnC Activity M2
ETPRO TROJAN Possible bazaloader CnC Activity M1
ETPRO TROJAN SSL/TLS Certificate Observed (bazaloader)
ETPRO TROJAN SSL/TLS Certificate Observed (bazaloader)
ETPRO TROJAN Observed bazaLoader User-Agent
ETPRO TROJAN bazar Backdoor CnC Activity
ETPRO TROJAN bazaBackdoor Variant CnC Activity M3
ETPRO TROJAN bazaBackdoor Variant CnC Activity M2
ETPRO TROJAN bazaLoader Variant CnC Activity M1
ETPRO TROJAN bazaLoader CnC (Download Request)
ETPRO TROJAN bazaBackdoor Variant CnC (Checkin)
ET TROJAN bazaloader Variant Activity
ET TROJAN bazaloader Variant Activity
ET TROJAN Observed Malicious SSL Cert (bazaLoader CnC)
ET TROJAN Observed Malicious SSL Cert (bazar Backdoor)
ET TROJAN Observed Malicious DNS Query (bazarLoader/Team9 Backdoor CnC Domain)
ET TROJAN Observed Malicious DNS Query (bazarLoader/Team9 Backdoor CnC Domain)
ET TROJAN Observed Malicious DNS Query (bazarLoader/Team9 Backdoor CnC Domain)
ET TROJAN Observed Malicious DNS Query (bazarLoader/Team9 Backdoor CnC Domain)
ET TROJAN bazaR CnC Domain in DNS Lookup
ET TROJAN bazaR CnC Domain in DNS Lookup
ET TROJAN bazaR CnC Domain in DNS Lookup
ET TROJAN bazaR CnC Domain in DNS Lookup
ET TROJAN bazaR CnC Domain in DNS Lookup
ET INFO Observed DNS Query for EmerDNS TLD (.bazar)
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
