An official website of the United States government Here's how you know
This Joint Cybersecurity Advisory uses the MITRE Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge (ATT&CK®) framework, Version 9.
See the ATT&CK for Enterprise for all referenced threat actor tactics and techniques.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) are engaged in addressing a spearphishing campaign targeting government organizations, intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
A sophisticated cyber threat actor leveraged a compromised end-user account from Constant Contact, a legitimate email marketing software company, to spoof a U.S.-based government organization and distribute links to malicious URLs.
[1] CISA and FBI have not determined that any individual accounts have been specifically targeted by this campaign.
Note: CISA and FBI acknowledge open-source reporting attributing the activity discussed in the report to APT29 (also known as Nobelium, The Dukes, and Cozy Bear).
[2,3] However, CISA and FBI are investigating this activity and have not attributed it to any threat actor at this time.
CISA and FBI will update this Joint Cybersecurity Advisory as new information becomes available.
This Joint Cybersecurity Advisory contains information on tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) and malware associated with this campaign.
For more information on the malware, refer to Malware Analysis Report MAR-10339794-1.v1: Cobalt Strike Beacon.
CISA and FBI urge governmental and international affairs organizations and individuals associated with such organizations to adopt a heightened state of awareness and implement the recommendations in the Mitigations section of this advisory.
For a downloadable list of indicators of compromise (IOCs), refer to AA21-148A.stix, and MAR-10339794-1.v1.stix.
Click here for a PDF version of this report.
Based on incident reports, malware collection, and trusted third-party reporting, CISA and FBI are engaged in addressing a sophisticated spearphishing campaign.
A cyber threat actor leveraged a compromised end-user account from Constant Contact, a legitimate email marketing software company, to send phishing emails to more than 7,000 accounts across approximately 350 government organizations, IGOs, and NGOs.
The threat actor sent spoofed emails that appeared to originate from a U.S. Government organization.
The emails contained a legitimate Constant Contact link that redirected to a malicious URL [T1566.002, T1204.001], from which a malicious ISO file was dropped onto the victim’s machine.
Figure 1: Decoy PDF: ICA-declass.pdf
Cobalt Strike is a commercial penetration testing tool used to conduct red team operations.
[4] It contains a number of tools that complement the cyber threat actor’s exploitation efforts, such as a keystroke logger, file injection capability, and network services scanners.
The Cobalt Strike Beacon is the malicious implant that calls back to attacker-controlled infrastructure and checks for additional commands to execute on the compromised system [TA0011].
The configuration file for this Cobalt Strike Beacon implant contained communications protocols, an implant watermark, and the following hardcoded command and control (C2) domains:
The configuration file was encoded via an XOR with the key 0x2e and a 16-bit byte swap.
For more information on the ISO file and Cobalt Strike Beacon implant, including IOCs, refer to Malware Analysis Report MAR-10339794-1.v1: Cobalt Strike Beacon.
The following IOCS were derived from trusted third parties and open-source research.
For a downloadable list of IOCs, refer to AA21-148A.stix and MAR-10339794-1.v1.stix.
Table 1 provides a summary of the MITRE ATT&CK techniques observed.
Table 1: MITRE ATT&CK techniques observed
Process Injection: Dynamic-link Library Injection
CISA and FBI urge CI owners and operators to apply the following mitigations.
To report suspicious or criminal activity related to information found in this Joint Cybersecurity Advisory, contact your local FBI field office at www.fbi.gov/contact-us/field, or the FBI’s 24/7 Cyber Watch (CyWatch) at (855) 292-3937 or by e-mail at CyWatch@fbi.gov.
When available, please include the following information regarding the incident: date, time, and location of the incident; type of activity; number of people affected; type of equipment used for the activity; the name of the submitting company or organization; and a designated point of contact.
To request incident response resources or technical assistance related to these threats, contact CISA at CISAServiceDesk@cisa.dhs.gov.
This document is marked TLP:WHITE.
Sources may use TLP:WHITE when information carries minimal or no foreseeable risk of misuse, in accordance with applicable rules and procedures for public release.
Subject to standard copyright rules, TLP:WHITE information may be distributed without restriction.
For more information on the Traffic Light Protocol, see http://www.us-cert.gov/tlp/.
This product is provided subject to this Notification and this Privacy & Use policy.
We recently updated our anonymous product survey; we'd welcome your feedback.
Receive security alerts, tips, and other updates.
CISA is part of the Department of Homeland Security
