Listen to this podcast now on iTunes, Soundcloud or wherever you find your favorite audio content.
On today’s special edition of X-Force Red in Action, global partner and head of IBM X-Force Red Charles Henderson joins the podcast to discuss the team’s plans for Black Hat, as well as a couple of big announcements.
This year marks IBM X-Force Red’s second birthday, Henderson notes proudly and with a tinge of disbelief.
After formally adding automotive and Internet of Things (IoT) practices at last year’s first birthday celebration, the team is continuing the tradition this year by announcing a new automated teller machine (ATM) testing practice.
The gift that truly keeps on giving, however, comes courtesy of the brand new X-Force Red Labs: The team now has physical spaces in Austin, Texas; Hursley, U.K.; Melbourne, Australia; and Atlanta, Georgia, dedicated to hardware testing that’s too advanced for clients to achieve in-house.
By consolidating tool sets and working across lab environments, Red Labs enables companies to leverage the collective knowledge of IBM X-Force Red experts and empowers these teams to embrace Red Labs’ new mission statement: “Hacking anything to secure everything.”
Listen to the podcast
According to Henderson, the secret to IBM X-Force Red’s success — and its 70 percent year-over-year growth, despite the growing IT skills gap — is the team culture.
For him, it’s all about family — making sure everyone is comfortable and has a smile on their face.
After all, as Henderson puts it, good humor at work translates to better overall performance.
So, what’s happening at Black Hat for IBM X-Force Red this year?
First up is the booth: Snag a laptop sticker, grab a team member for an engaging conversation about your organization’s needs and enjoy a drink at the attached bar.
(Yes, you read that right!)
At both Black Hat and DEF CON you can also catch Daniel Crowley, research director at IBM X-Force Red, Mauro Paredes, managing consultant at IBM X-Force Red, and Jennifer Savage, security researcher at Threatcare, delivering their original research: “Outsmarting the Smart City.”
The IBM X-Force Red team will be well-represented at Black Hat as well as DEF CON.
Stop by the booth and attend the sessions to meet members of the team and learn more about Red Labs, the new ATM testing practices and all the latest trends and developments in offensive security.
Read the IBM X-Force Research Report: Weaponizing the Internet of Things
Never miss a new episode of X-Force Red in Action!
Subscribe to the SecurityIntelligence Podcast on iTunes or your favorite podcast platform.
