Listen to this podcast now on iTunes, Soundcloud or wherever you find your favorite content.
On this week’s IBM X-Force Red podcast, we discover what it’s like to work for IBM’s offensive security arm — from an intern’s perspective.
Listen now to get the inside scoop from four members of the team’s inaugural intern class: Daniel Pagan from Georgia Tech, Hannah Robbins from the University of Tulsa, Michael Roberts from the University of Central Florida and Scott Brink from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
The X-Force Red interns may still be students, but the team has put them to work on some pretty serious tasks.
Brink is working on the security of visitor-management technology, while Robbins is digging into the iOS and database side of these systems.
Roberts is tackling post-exploitation tool improvement, and Pagan is working on a personal project to brute-force Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).
But don’t worry — it’s not all nose-to-the-grindstone for the interns.
Brink spoke about spending his first week at IBM seeking out rogue access points.
To keep things interesting, one team lead spent days following them around — creating Wi-Fi networks that continuously beaconed off Rick Astley’s viral hit “Never Gonna Give You Up.”
Pagan, meanwhile, is most enjoying the freedom IBM affords him to choose his own research projects and take on new challenges.
Listen to the podcast
When asked to describe their work environment in one word, the interns provided four telling answers: research, passionate, challenging and exciting.
The IBM X-Force team is always looking for recruits — both interns and seasoned security professionals.
If you run into an IBM team member at the 2018 Black Hat conference in Las Vegas, Nevada, he or she will be happy to help get you started on the application process.
Read the interactive white paper: Preempt attacks with programmatic and active testing
Never miss a new episode of X-Force Red in Action!
Subscribe to the SecurityIntelligence Podcast on iTunes or your favorite podcast platform.
