All of us in the security industry realize that we face a virtually insurmountable task to ensure that the data belonging to our organizations and customers is kept safe and secure.
If you step back and think about it, the list of potential perpetrators is daunting in scope.
It includes cybercriminals, hacktivists, foreign governments, and both malicious and negligent insiders.
Not only are they persistent, but they also work together like a well-oiled college basketball team determined to cut down the nets — except cybercriminals are working toward the singular goal of gaining illegal access to data.
The tools cybercriminals use to achieve this goal vary, but they are all designed to exploit weaknesses, both human and technological, and defeat or disrupt the many layers organizations put in place to protect their critical assets.
It’s the ultimate game of cyber cat and mouse in which the opponents deploy cunning techniques to trick innocent bystanders into letting their guard down.
Investment in robust, cutting-edge security systems and thorough training are crucial to prevent such activity.
Of course, the security teams we have in place to protect our digital information deserve a lot of credit for applying their know-how and skills to use advanced capabilities such as artificial intelligence (AI)-powered network monitoring and timely threat intelligence.
If you stop and think about it, threat data really is a make-or-break part of the security playbook.
Many people either take it for granted or just assume it’s something to toss into the mix and forget about.
Few realize how threat intelligence can empower an organization’s security team.
The Ponemon Institute’s “2017 Cost of Data Breach Study” supported this premise, noting that the time it takes to identify and contain a data breach has been reduced due to “investments in such enabling security technologies as security analytics, SIEM, enterprisewide encryption and threat intelligence sharing platforms.”
When your security systems have the most current intelligence, your analysts can make educated decisions with detailed information.
Like a basketball team seamlessly working together on the court, you and your security team can use threat intelligence to get ahead in the big game of cyberdefense.
So what does this mean for your organization?
Are you ready cut down the nets, so to speak?
To gear up, make sure you’re taking advantage of the IBM X-Force Exchange to strengthen your defenses.
By collecting and sharing threat intelligence, you can create the best playbook to help your security team research threats, collaborate with peers, and take swift and coordinated action to protect corporate and customer data.
