What’s the connection between cybercrime and cryptocurrencies?
Perhaps it would suffice to say that the reasons for criminals adopting the cryptocoin are quite obvious.
But when did this all start, and what fuels it and gets fueled in return?
This blog will go over some of the historical reasons that connect cybercrime and cryptocurrency as well as examine the possible consequences of that connection.
Cybercriminals and anonymized payment methods always kept a close relationship for obvious reasons.
One of the most lucrative aspects of online crime is the ability to conceal one’s identity, and using cryptographic currencies is part of that overall scheme.
Historically, the connection between cybercrime and cryptocoins was not always the default.
In the years before the Dark Web emerged, when fraudsters mostly congregated on IRC channels and in underground forums, that relationship was backed up by other means.
From prepaid payment cards to alternative goods, such as stored value cards or even loyalty points and air miles, fraudsters flocked to platforms that allowed users to identify themselves only by digital means, without demanding any solid proof of identity or verifying it, for that matter.
Over the years, these platforms gradually became less lucrative to the cybercrime crowd because of two major reasons.
One such case was WebMoney, which was a payment platform established in Moscow in 1998.
Unlike competing platforms at the time, WebMoney (WMZ) did not require connection to a bank account or credit card.
Although it was an inherently legitimate business, it attracted cybercriminals who used it as their top cash and credit exchange platform.
In 2013, the Ukrainian government accused WebMoney of illicit activity and seized $7.5 million in WebMoney-linked companies’ bank accounts, as well as computer systems used for the operation of the platform.
WebMoney had to clean up its platform, which it did.
It rose above its past issues to become a banking partner and active global exchange platform to this very day.
One of the most publicized cases of a platform shutdown was that of Liberty Reserve, the exchange platform that became the de-facto standard in cybercrime forums until it was investigated by law enforcement, found to have laundered $6 billion, and shut down indefinitely in 2013.
Preeta Bharara, the then U.S. attorney for the southern district on New York who charged the case, said that the organization became the “bank of choice for the criminal underworld.”
The same fate befell other players such as e-Gold, which was another very popular exchange platform cybercriminals favored.
The reaction in the underground world was to quickly turn to another, similar platform called PerfectMoney.
But that did not last, possibly because of its similarity to the previously failed Liberty Reserve.
It was around that time that the cryptocurrency connection, especially with bitcoin, gained a foothold in the cybercrime arena — not because it had any connection to illicit activity, but because of its inherent ability to keep users anonymous while providing monetary value.
Although some cybercriminals started adopting bitcoin as their preferred payment method earlier on, it was the 2013 shutdown of Liberty Reserve that marked the end of an era and saw practically every illicit service and commodity peddler move to exchange money via a bitcoin wallet.
Seeing the rising value of cryptocurrency in the underground, banking Trojans that used to solely focus on bank websites then started to either covertly mine bitcoin, steal wallets or both on the infected endpoints they managed to control.
As the value of the currency continued rising in the legitimate world, it also increased the affinity of cybercriminals for the cryptocoin and for other coins that came after it.
At the time of this writing, the bitcoin exchange rate to U.S. dollars is at $3,961 per coin.
