An official website of the United States government

Official websites use .gov

              A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

              A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website.
Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
“Today’s announcement demonstrates the FBI’s unceasing commitment to unmasking and stopping the malicious actors and countries behind the world’s cyberattacks,” said FBI Director Christopher Wray.
“We stand with our partners to name the North Korean government as the force behind this destructive global cyber campaign.
This group’s actions are particularly egregious as they targeted public and private industries worldwide – stealing millions of dollars, threatening to suppress free speech, and crippling hospital systems.
We’ll continue to identify and illuminate those responsible for malicious cyberattacks and intrusions, no matter who or where they are.”
 “The scale and scope of the cyber-crimes alleged by the Complaint is staggering and offensive to all who respect the rule of law and the cyber norms accepted by responsible nations,” said Assistant Attorney General Demers.
The investigation, prosecution, and other disruption of malicious state-sponsored cyber activity remains among the highest priorities of the National Security Division and I thank the FBI agents, DOJ prosecutors, and international partners who have put years of effort into this investigation.”
“The complaint charges members of this North Korean-based conspiracy with being responsible for cyberattacks that caused unprecedented economic damage and disruption to businesses in the United States and around the globe,” said First Assistant United States Attorney Tracy Wilkison.
“The scope of this scheme was exposed through the diligent efforts of FBI agents and federal prosecutors who were able to unmask these sophisticated crimes through sophisticated means.
They traced the attacks back to the source and mapped their commonalities, including similarities among the various programs used to infect networks across the globe.
These charges send a message that we will track down malicious actors no matter how or where they hide.
We will continue to pursue justice for those responsible for the huge monetary losses and attempting to compromise the national security of the United States.”
“We will not allow North Korea to undermine global cybersecurity to advance its interests and generate illicit revenues in violation of our sanctions,” said Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.
“The United States is committed to holding the regime accountable for its cyber-attacks and other crimes and destabilizing activities.”
Park is charged with one count of conspiracy to commit computer fraud and abuse, which carries a maximum sentence of five years in prison, and one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud, which carries a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison.
About the Defendant Park and Chosun Expo Joint Venture
According to the allegations contained in the criminal complaint, which was filed on June 8, 2018 in Los Angeles federal court, and posted today:  Park Jin Hyok, was a computer programmer who worked for over a decade for Chosun Expo Joint Venture (a/k/a Korea Expo Joint Venture or “KEJV”).
Chosun Expo Joint Venture had offices in China and the DPRK, and is affiliated with Lab 110, a component of DPRK military intelligence.
In addition to the programming done by Park and his group for paying clients around the world, the Conspiracy also engaged in malicious cyber activities.
The Conspiracy’s Cyber Attacks, Heists, and Intrusions
The complaint describes a broad array of the Conspiracy’s alleged malicious cyber activities, both successful and unsuccessful, and in the United States and abroad, with a particular focus on four specific examples.
In November 2014, the conspirators launched a destructive attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment (SPE) in retaliation for the movie “The Interview,” a farcical comedy that depicted the assassination of the DPRK’s leader.
The conspirators gained access to SPE’s network by sending malware to SPE employees, and then stole confidential data, threatened SPE executives and employees, and damaged thousands of computers.
Around the same time, the group sent spear-phishing messages to other victims in the entertainment industry, including a movie theater chain and a U.K. company that was producing a fictional series involving a British nuclear scientist taken prisoner in DPRK.
In February 2016, the Conspiracy stole $81 million from Bangladesh Bank.
The Conspiracy attempted to and did gain access to several other banks in various countries from 2015 through 2018 using similar methods and “watering hole attacks,” attempting the theft of at least $1 billion through such operations.
Targeting of U.S. Defense Contractors
In 2016 and 2017, the Conspiracy targeted a number of U.S. defense contractors, including Lockheed Martin, with spear-phishing emails.
These malicious emails used some of the same aliases and accounts seen in the SPE attack, at times accessed from North Korean IP addresses, and contained malware with the same distinct data table found in the malware used against SPE and certain banks, the complaint alleges.
The attempts to infiltrate the computer systems of Lockheed Martin, the prime contractor for the THAAD missile system, were not successful.
In May 2017, a ransomware attack known as WannaCry 2.0 infected hundreds of thousands of computers around the world, causing extensive damage, including significantly impacting the United Kingdom’s National Health Service.
Some of this malicious infrastructure was used across multiple instances of the malicious activities described herein.
Taken together, these connections and signatures—revealed in charts attached to the criminal complaint—show that the attacks and intrusions were perpetrated by the same actors.
That direct sharing of information took place in the United States and in foreign countries, often with the assistance of foreign law enforcement partners.
The FBI also has collaborated with certain private cybersecurity companies by sharing and analyzing information about the intrusion patterns used by the members of the conspiracy.
The maximum potential sentences in this case are prescribed by Congress and are provided here for informational purposes only, as any sentencings of the defendant will be determined by the assigned judge.
The Criminal Division’s Office of International Affairs provided assistance throughout this investigation, as did many of the FBI’s Legal Attachés, and foreign authorities around the world.
The charges contained in the criminal complaint are merely accusations and the defendant is presumed innocent unless and until proven guilty.
For the U.S. Department of Treasury’s press release announcing corresponding sanctions please visit www.treasury.gov.
