Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
Firefox now shows ads as sponsored address bar suggestions
European Parliament calls for ban on AI-powered mass surveillance
Twitch: No credentials or card numbers exposed in data breach
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Mozilla upgrades older Thunderbird clients to the latest version
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
For a month leading up to today's historic meet between North and South Korea's presidents, a North Korean hacking group has amplified operations and has targeted a wide variety of business sectors in at least 17 countries.
The purpose of this campaign was to infect organizations, perform reconnaissance, and steal sensitive data.
Targeted industries included critical infrastructure, entertainment, finance, healthcare, and telecommunications.
This overly aggressive campaign appears to be a new operation carried out by a group of hackers primarily known as Lazarus Group, the ones responsible for the infamous Sony Studios hack in 2014.
Other names for this group are Hidden Cobra, the name US authorities are using to describe it, but also the Hastati Group, Group 77, or Labyrinth Chollima.
The group operates in bursts of hacking activity aimed at specific targets.
Past operations include Operation Troy, Blockbuster, or Dark Seoul.
The most recent Lazarus Group operation is codenamed Operation GhostSecret and appears to have started in mid-March 2018 with attacks targeting the Turkish financial sector.
Cybersecurity firm McAfee describes this particular campaign as sophisticated due to the "significant capabilities, demonstrated by their tools development and the pace at which [the attackers] operate."
Researchers identified malware with shared capabilities to hacking tools used in the 2014 Sony hack, but they also found newer tools such as Bankshot (implant), Proxysvc (downloader), and Escad (backdoor).
Experts noted that despite exposing the first attacks on the Turkish financial sector, the group continued its attacks unphased by the attention their tools and hacking infrastructure were getting.
Furthermore, attacks seem to have ramped up, most likely in an attempt to use hacking tools while they were still effective and before security software would be able to detect them.
McAfee said it alerted the Thai government that some of the command and control servers used for Operation GhostSecret were hosted on the compromised servers of Thammasat University in Bangkok.
ThaiCERT seized and shut down the servers two days ago.
A full and detailed report on Operation GhostSecret, including IoCs, is available here.
Hackers use stealthy ShellClient malware on aerospace, telco firms
Russian state hackers use new TinyTurla malware as secondary backdoor
Lazarus Hackers Use TrickBot to Infect High-End Victims
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
GhostEmperor hackers use new Windows 10 rootkit in attacks
Perhaps, NK figures it can accomplish its goals more effectively via cyber.
If they have effective assets in place now (with the constraints and sanctions), how much more effective would they be with more money and access?
Maybe Kim thinks the Democrats are right about the Russians using cyber to sway the U.S. 2016 elections; and he can do even better with next elections in SK, Japan.... Don't think he has to worry about the next election in NK.
With their nuclear program, it will take time even to establish the framework of an agreement; then more time to implement - and if they eventually close all their facilities; will all their nukes go to China and Russia, as Syria's chemical weapons did to Russia?
Suppose they do shed their nukes; they still have enough conventional artillery to flatten the SK capital; it would just take minutes, rather than seconds.
A treaty, would void the UN use-of-force resolution from 1950 - and good luck getting another one past Russia and China.
Still, today's breakthrough is a reason for optimism; just as long as it's tempered with skepticism - and for heaven's sake: don't send John (let's make a deal), Kerry to negotiate!
Indeed since it is know that only 30 computes exist on NK and they are in control of the government, so obviously it is the government, why are we playing stupid?
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
