Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
AZORult is a robust information stealer & downloader that Proofpoint researchers originally identified in 2016 as part of a secondary infection via the Chthonic banking Trojan.
We have since observed many instances of AZORult dropped via exploit kits and in fairly regular email campaigns as both a primary and secondary payload.
Recently, AZORult authors released a substantially updated version, improving both on its stealer and downloader functionality.
It is noteworthy that within a day of the new update appearing on underground forums, a prolific actor used the new version in a large email campaign, leveraging its new capabilities to distribute Hermes ransomware.
On July 17, a major update to the AZORult credential stealer and downloader was advertised on an underground forum.
The change log for the new version -- Version 3.2 -- is shown below.
The conditional loader feature, based on the presence of cookies, cryptocurrency wallets, and other parameters, is particularly noteworthy.
On July 18, 2018, one day after the AZORult update above was announced, we observed a campaign delivering thousands of messages targeting North America that used the new version of AZORult.
The messages used employment-related subjects such as “About a role” and “Job Application”.
The attached documents used file names in the format of “firstname.surname_resume.doc”.
Figure 1: Email used in the July 18 campaign
The documents in this campaign were password-protected.
The password was included in the body of the original email and, in this case, was ‘789’, as visible in Figure 1 above.
This technique is an attempt to evade various antivirus engines, since the document itself is not malicious until the password is entered successfully.
Once potential victims enter the password, they also need to enable macros for the document to download AZORult, which in turn downloads the Hermes 2.1 ransomware payload.
Figure 2: Document attachment used in the July 18 campaign
We attribute this campaign to an actor we track as TA516.
In 2017 we presented research on TA516 and ways in which this actor used documents with similar resume lures to download banking Trojans or a Monero miner.
Improved means of stealing cryptocurrency wallets and credentials in the new version of AZORult might also provide a connection to TA516’s demonstrated interests in cryptocurrencies.
Once the recipient opens the password-protected document and enables the embedded macros, the macros download AZORult.
While there were many code changes to the malware, we focused on analyzing the updated command and control (C&C) communication protocol.
The following POST is an initial client-to-server communication, where the client sends an initial checkin request and the server responds with data XOR-encoded with a 3-byte key (The XOR key in this case was \x0d0ac8).
If we decode this data, the server response begins with a base64-encoded configuration block.
Figure 3: Initial client beacon followed by the encoded server response
Figure 4: Initial client beacon followed by the server response (decoded by us manually)
As Figure 4 shows, there is a base64 string (configuration block) included in the server response between the “<c>” and “</c>” tags.
It decodes to the following, revealing cryptocurrency strings of interest:
I      <REMOVED, IP ADDRESS OF THE INFECTED CLIENT>:<COUNTRY OF THE INFECTED CLIENT>
We can also see another encoded block after the base64 string  (only the beginning of the block is shown for brevity).
This is yet another XOR-encoded data block, where the key is 4 bytes.
Decoding this second encoded data block reveals additional configuration information and executable files such as mozglue.dll, nssdbm3.dll, softokn3.dll, ucrtbase.dll, or vcruntime140.dll.
While the purpose of these executables is not known, we do not see any reason to send these other than to perhaps delay reverse engineering and analysis.
Next, after the initial exchange between the infected machine and the C&C server, the infected machine sends a report containing the stolen information.
Again the report is XOR-encoded with the same 3-byte key; a portion of  the decoded version is shown in Figure 5.
The stolen information is organized into sections:
Figure 5: A report of stolen information sent by the infected machine (only a snippet is shown here)
Finally, after the initial beaconing, receiving a configuration, and exfiltrating stolen information from the infected machine, AZORult may download the next payload.
For example, in the campaign described at the beginning of this post, AZORult downloads Hermes 2.1 ransomware  after it exfiltrates the victim’s data and credentials.
As in legitimate software development, malware authors regularly update their software to introduce competitive new features, improve usability, and otherwise differentiate their products.
The recent update to AZORult includes substantial upgrades to malware that was already well-established in both the email and web-based threat landscapes.
It is noteworthy that within a day of the new update appearing on underground forums, a prolific actor used the new version in a large email campaign, leveraging its new capabilities to distribute Hermes ransomware.
The potential impact of this type of attack is considerable:
ET and ETPRO Suricata/Snort/ClamAV Signatures
2025885 || ET TROJAN AZORult Variant.4 Checkin
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
