This blog recently referenced a late July VNCert report containing file-based IOCs affiliated with attempted intrusions against financial organizations in Vietnam.
Several contextual and technical characteristics of these files tie them to recent activity typically attributed to North Korean adversaries with a specific interest in the financial sector.
This post explores the technical characteristics of one of these files, a keylogging and screengrabbing utility.
Two versions of this utility have appeared in-the-wild.
The first is directly identified in the VNCert alert and is a DLL injected via a modified version of the open-source PowerSploit framework.
The second is a standalone executable submitted to VirusTotal by a user in Pakistan (and possibly used in an intrusion in that region).
This script also contains references to “c:\windows\temp\TMP0389A.tmp” (noted in the previous post for its similarity to another DPRK file path and directory) and “c:\programdata\1.dat” as part of a “remove-item” cmdlet routine.
At launch, the malware creates a file at “c:\windows\temp\TMP0389A.tmp” containing the directory that the malware will save files in.Next, the file begins monitoring keystrokes.
The malware’s other functionality is to capture the desktop, compressing the images and saving them in the same directory.
These files are saved with the filename format chromeupdater_ps_[timestamp].
Notably, the malware uses two open-source implementations to achieve this.
To capture the desktop, it uses code likely derived from this example (or code from which that example was derived).
To perform compression, the malware uses the XZip library, a derivation of the Info-Zip project.
The combination of these characteristics is useful for identifying an additional variant of this malware.
On the other hand, the malicious files include the Vietnam keylogger and a second keylogger submitted by a user in Pakistan with strikingly similar static and dynamic properties (the hash of this file is listed above).
Notably, this “new” file also contains the same exported function name (“Process”) as the Vietnam DLL despite being an executable, suggesting that it may have been built using the same codebase.
In addition, the file contains a reference to the same “TMP0389A.tmp” file and path as the Vietnam keylogger (though this is decoded at runtime).
As with the Vietnam file, this file’s two core functions are screengrabbing (using the same library) and keylogging.
Both files are stored at “Appdata\Local\Temp\Downloads.” Screenshots are generated as Bitmaps via CreateCompatibleBitmap, compressed, and saved in this directory as “tmp_[username][mmdd{time}]” (e.g.
As additional screenshots are created, they are appended to the same file (although re-running the malware will create a new file).
Neither variant of the malware is particularly sophisticated; in fact, key components of each rely on clunky implementations of open source tools and code (including screengrabbing, compression, and memory injection).
This deficiency is most evident in the screenshot compression segment, in which new data is simply appended to an older file.
A tool such as 7Zip cannot properly unpack every screenshot appended this way; instead, the adversary would need to manually carve these out (or write an additional tool to do so) given the fact that additional zip data is simply appended to the end of the file.
It is also worth noting that neither file contains a C2 mechanism, meaning that log files and compressed images would have to be extracted from the target device manually.
This suggests that these tools are designed for post-compromise use, possibly on machines intended to be monitored for an extended period of time.
