North Korea (specifically the Lazarus group) has a long and storied history of destructive cyber-attacks.
Some more notable examples are the 2013 “Dark Seoul” attacks, the 2014 attack on Sony Pictures, a series of SWIFT-targeted campaigns in 2015-2016, and more recently their foray into commercial cybercrime operations with Trickbot and Anchor.
The US-CERT recently released a new set of MARs (Malware Analysis Reports) covering newly uncovered/updated malware/implants attributed to North Korea.
More specifically, these are tools attributed to the Lazarus Group / Hidden Cobra.
These updates provide a sizeable glimpse into the ever expanding DPRK toolset.
As we have seen in the past, the complexity and sophistication of these tools varies widely.
Most of the families covered in this update are meant to function as RATs or Cobalt-Strike-like (beacon) tools meant to enable persistence and manipulation of infected hosts.
Full Featured RAT (Remote Access Trojan) payloads and associated CAgent11 implant builder/controller.
This implant is used for standard system management, control and recon.
Initial infection is carried out via a malicious executable.
An embedded bitmap image (contained in the trojan) is decoded into shellcode upon execution, thus loading the implant.
Network communications are encrypted via XOR.
The analyzed BISTROMATH samples, along with the other families all attempt to evade analysis via common sandboxes (VIRTUALBOX, QEMU, VMware) via multiple artifact checks (presence of specific devices, registry entries, processes, files).
Proxy payload to obfuscate and/or re-route traffic between infected hosts and C2.
Traffic is encrypted over SSL, and the individual payloads are capable of generating fake SSL Certificates.
Analyzed samples are Themida packed.
One of the examples (SHA256: d77fdabe17cdba62a8e728cbe6c740e2c2e541072501f77988674e07a05dfb39) provided by CISA contained a public SSL certificate and encrypted payload.
SLICKSHOES is typically utilized as a loader/Dropper.
The malware writes itself to “C:WindowsWebtaskenc.exe”.
Separate processes are responsible for the manipulation and execution of the dropped executable.
SLICKSHOES is a full beacon-style implant (similar to Cobalt Strike).
Makes use of bespoke encoding methods and is capable of RAT-like functionality.
· File and Process manipulation· System recon and exfiltration· Input capture· Command/process execution and manipulation
SLICKSHOES communicates to a hardcoded C2 address (188[.]165[.]37[.
]168) on TCP port 80.
Communication occurs in 60-second intervals.
CROWDEDFLOUNDER functions as a memory-resident RAT (32-bit and Themida packed).
The malware accepts arguments at runtime, and can be installed as a service.
CROWDEDFLOUNDER implants can perform full two-way comms with C2, however in context the primary function appears to be a proxy for inbound connections from the C2.
Upon execution the malware will manipulate local firewall settings to allow for flow of its traffic.
C2 traffic and data transfers are encrypted via rotating XOR.
· File and Process manipulation· System recon and exfiltration· Input capture· Command/process execution and manipulation
HOTCROISSANT is a full beacon-style (Cobalt Strike style) implant with RAT-like functionality.
Network traffic is encoded via XOR.
C2 communications are limited to a hard-coded IP (94.177.123.138:8088).
Upon infection, victim information is transferred to the C2.
After this point, the malware listens and responds to commands from the C2.
ARTFULPIE is responsible for retrieval and injection of a DLL-based payload.
The malware contains a hard-coded URL from which to download the additional code (193[.]56[.]28[.
BUFFETLINE is a full, beacon-style, implant with RAT-like functionality.
· File and Process manipulation· System recon and exfiltration· CLI status manipulation· Lateral targeting & enumeration· Command/process execution and manipulation
Analyzed samples utilize a combination of RC4 encoding and PolarSSL (auth) to obfuscate network communications.
Once authenticated to the C2, the trojan will send a collection of victim information and then await further interaction.
· Victim “ID”· Implant Version· System directory location· Hardware details (network adapters, CPU revision)· OS Version / Software environment data· Computer Name· Victim IP Address
Adversarial toolsets are constantly evolving.
The upper tier of sophisticated, or state-backed threats, have rapid and agile development/release cycles, mirroring the world of legitimate software development.
Staying on top of these trends is a critical piece of protecting our environments against these threats.
A power and modern security platform (ex: SentinelOne Singularity) is required to tackle these evolving threats from both static and behavioral angles.
Get notified when we post new content.
Keep an eye out for new content!
In the era of interconnectivity, when markets, geographies, and jurisdictions merge in the melting pot of the digital domain, the perils of the threat ecosystem become unparalleled.
Crimeware families achieve an unparalleled level of technical sophistication, APT groups are competing in fully-fledged cyber warfare, while once decentralized and scattered threat actors are forming adamant alliances of operating as elite corporate espionage teams.
Get notified when we post new content.
Keep an eye out for new content!
