Blog update following the release of the testimony by Shawn Henry, CSO and President of CrowdStrike Services, before the House Intelligence Committee that was recently declassified.
What was CrowdStrike’s role in investigating the hack of the DNC?
CrowdStrike was contacted on April 30, 2016 to respond to a suspected breach.
We began our work with the DNC on May 1, 2016, collecting intelligence and analyzing the breach.
After conducting this analysis and identifying the adversaries on the network, on June 10, 2016 we initiated a coordinated remediation event to ensure the intruders were removed and could not regain access.
That remediation process lasted approximately 2-3 days and was completed on June 13, 2016.
Why did the DNC contact CrowdStrike?
The DNC contacted CrowdStrike to respond to a suspected cyber attack impacting its network.
The DNC was first alerted to the hack by the FBI in September 2015.
According to testimony by DNC IT contractor Yared Tamene Wolde-Yohannes, the FBI attributed the breach to the Russian Government in September 2015 (page 7).
Why did the DNC hire CrowdStrike instead of just working with the FBI to investigate the hack?
The FBI doesn’t perform incident response or network remediation services when organizations need to get back to business after a breach.
CrowdStrike is a leader in protecting customers around the world from cyber threats.
It is common for organizations to hire third-party industry experts, like CrowdStrike, to investigate and remediate cyber attacks when they suspect a breach even if they are collaborating with law enforcement.
As John Carlin, former Assistant Attorney General for the National Security Division at The Department of Justice, testified before the House Intelligence Committee (cited from page 21 of his testimony):
“A lot of — outside of any political organization, companies, most corporations, they often would use these third party contractors, who they hired through their own counsel, and maximize the control from the point of view of the victim.”
Did CrowdStrike have proof that Russia hacked the DNC?
Yes, and this is also supported by the U.S. Intelligence community and independent Congressional reports.
Following a comprehensive investigation that CrowdStrike detailed publicly, the company concluded in May 2016 that two separate Russian intelligence-affiliated adversaries breached the DNC network.
To reference, CrowdStrike’s account of their DNC investigation, published on June 14, 2016, “CrowdStrike Services Inc., our Incident Response group, was called by the Democratic National Committee (DNC), the formal governing body for the US Democratic Party, to respond to a suspected breach.
We deployed our IR team and technology and immediately identified two sophisticated adversaries on the network – COZY BEAR and FANCY BEAR….
At DNC, COZY BEAR intrusion has been identified going back to summer of 2015, while FANCY BEAR separately breached the network in April 2016.”
This conclusion has most recently been supported by the Senate Intelligence Committee in April 2020 issuing a report [intelligence.senate.gov] validating the previous conclusions of the Intelligence community, published on January 6, 2017,  that Russia was behind the DNC data breach.
The Senate report states on page 48:
“The Committee found that specific intelligence as well as open source assessments support the assessment that President Putin approved and directed aspects of this influence campaign.”
Furthermore, in his testimony in front of the House Intelligence Committee, Shawn Henry stated the following with regards to CrowdStrike’s degree of confidence that the intrusion activity can be attributed to Russia, cited from page 24:
Have any other organizations concluded that Russia was behind the DNC hack?
CrowdStrike’s conclusion that Russia was behind the DNC hack is supported by the U.S. Intelligence community and also by independent Congressional reports.
Most recently, the Senate Intelligence Committee released a report in April 2020 that validated the previous conclusions of the Intelligence Community Assessment, published on January 6, 2017, all concluding that Russia was behind the DNC data breach.
It’s also worth noting that other security companies, including Fidelis and FireEye have supported CrowdStrike’s analysis.
Does CrowdStrike have evidence that data was exfiltrated from the DNC network?
Shawn Henry stated in his testimony to the House Intelligence Committee that CrowdStrike had indicators of exfiltration (page 32)  and that data had clearly left the network.
Also, on page 2, the Intelligence Community Assessment also confirmed that the Russian intelligence agency GRU “had exfiltrated large volumes of data from the DNC.”
Did CrowdStrike see in real-time the adversaries exfiltrate data and emails from the DNC network?
No and that’s typical for incident response cases.
In the vast majority of cyber investigations, incident responders don’t witness exfiltration in real-time.
In fact, often we are called in after theft has taken place.
We collect forensics, evidence of prior activity on the network, map where the adversary has gained access and prepare remediation plans.
In this particular case, CrowdStrike saw circumstantial evidence of data exfiltration from the DNC network.
As a reference point circumstantial evidence is the type of evidence such as DNA analysis or fingerprints that are fully admissible in courts.
Shawn Henry stated in his testimony that CrowdStrike had indicators of exfiltration (page 32 of the testimony):
“Counsel just reminded me that, as it relates to the DNC’ we have indicators that data was exfiltrated.
We did not have concrete evidence that data was exfiltrated from the DNC, but we have indicators that it was exfiltrated.’
and circumstantial evidence that data was taken as he states on page 75 ”so there is circumstantial evidence that it was taken” and page 76:
HENRY: So, to go back, because I think it’s important to characterize this.
We didn’t have a network sensor in place that saw data leave’ We said that the data Ieft based on the circumstantial evidence.
That was a conclusion that we made.
when I answered that question, I was trying to be as factually accurate’ I want to provide the facts.
so I said that we didn’t have direct evidence’ But we made a conclusion that the data left the network.”
On page 32 of the testimony, Henry also explains that
“Officers from Unit 26165 stole thousands of documents from the DCCC and DNC networks, including significant amounts of data pertaining to the 2016 U.S. federal elections.
Stolen documents included internal strategy documents, fundraising data, opposition research, and emails from the work inboxes of DNC employees.”
Is it true that part of the exfiltration happened after CrowdStrike was already engaged by the DNC?
This question about the specific timeline of the exfiltration is addressed directly by Shawn Henry in his testimony on page 26.
HENRY: So the analysis started the first day or two in May, and then that was about 4 to 6 weeks.
I think, on June 10th, we started what we call the remediation event.
so we collected enough intelligence.
We identified where the adversaries were in the environment’ We came up with a remediation plan to say we see them in multiple locations.
This – these are the actions that we need to execute in order to put a new infrastructure in place and to ensure that the adversaries don’t have access to the new infrastructure.
So that would have been June 10th when we started.
And we did the remediation event over a couple of days.”
Of note, it is a standard practice in incident response to first coordinate a remediation event to prevent the adversary from doing further damage and following that to fully restore network functionality.
We followed industry best practices to accomplish the fastest remediation path for our customer.
On page 27 of Shawn Henry’s testimony, he further explains CrowdStrike’s role as incident responders:
“To be clear, our goal, my goal was to protect the client.
We were hired to protect the client.
We identified an adversary there.
The goal was to make sure that the adversary was removed and the client had a clean environment with which to work.”
Did any DNC endpoints protected by your technology get breached in subsequent attacks?
There is no indication of subsequent breaches taking place on any DNC machine protected by CrowdStrike Falcon.
Do you have a comment about the allegation that Russia stole Democratic Party emails from John Podesta and then passed them to WikiLeaks?
CrowdStrike was not involved in investigating John Podesta’s email leaks.
Henry says on page 62 of this testimony, he “has no relationship with them [the Podesta emails].”
What is the timeline of the DNC hack?
According to public records, this is the timeline of the DNC hack that CrowdStrike was hired to investigate.
CrowdStrike is non-partisan – we routinely work with both Republican and Democratic organizations to protect them from cyber-attacks – along with thousands of other organizations around the world of all industries and sizes.
Here are a few key facts about CrowdStrike:
We are proud of our work and will remain focused on our mission of protecting our customers around the world from dangerous cyber threats.We are grateful that the media has debunked false claims about our work for the Democratic National Committee (DNC) in 2016:
With regards to our investigation of the DNC hack in 2016, we provided all forensic evidence and analysis to the FBI.
As we’ve stated before, we stand by our findings and conclusions that have been fully supported by the US Intelligence community.
FAQ on Recent News Coverage of CrowdStrike
CrowdStrike was founded by George Kurtz and Dmitri Alperovitch.
George is an American entrepreneur and recognized security expert, author, entrepreneur, and speaker.
He also started Foundstone, a worldwide security products and services company that was acquired by McAfee in 2004.
CrowdStrike’s Co-founder Dmitri Alperovitch is a Russia-born U.S. citizen, who has spent all of his adult life in the United States, and has no connection to Ukraine.
As a public company, our ownership is available on the SEC.gov website.
Do you stand behind your work for the DNC?
As we’ve repeatedly stated, we stand by the findings and analysis of our investigation, and, as detailed in our company statement, we’ve provided all forensic evidence and analysis to the FBI as requested.
Additionally, our findings have been supported by the U.S. intelligence community and other cybersecurity companies.
The investigation is detailed on our blog below.
Did you comply with FBI’s requests for information?
We’ve provided all forensic evidence and analysis to the FBI related to the DNC investigation as requested.
We have never declined any request for information from the FBI related to this investigation, and there are no pending requests for information by the FBI.
Do you have the DNC servers?
We have never taken physical possession of any DNC servers.
When cyber investigators respond to an incident, they capture that evidence in a process called “imaging.” It involves making an exact byte-for-byte copy of the hard drives.
They do the same for the machine’s memory, capturing evidence that would otherwise be lost at the next reboot, and they monitor and store the traffic passing through the victim’s network.
This has been standard procedure in incident response investigations for decades.
The images, not the computer’s hardware, provide the evidence.
Our cloud-native, crowdsourced approach to solving cybersecurity enables us to deliver state- of-the-art protection to organizations big and small.
Consequently, we are proud that customers from every major industry, level of government, and political affiliation turn to CrowdStrike to stop breaches.
Are you affiliated with the Democratic party?
CrowdStrike is not affiliated with any political party.
We are a public cybersecurity company, and are non-partisan.
We have done cybersecurity work for, and currently protect, both Republican and Democratic political organizations at the state, local, and federal level, and we have thousands of non-political companies and organizations as customers.
Do you have Secretary Hillary Clinton’s email server?
Have you ever had access to her emails?
We have never worked for Secretary Clinton or her campaign, and never had access to her server or emails.
Where can I find more information?
Many news outlets have written about CrowdStrike’s investigation of the DNC hack and subsequent comments made by President Trump.
You can learn more at:
CrowdStrike stands fully by its analysis and findings identifying two separate Russian intelligence-affiliated adversaries present in the DNC network in May 2016.
On June 15, 2016 a blog post to a WordPress site authored by an individual using the moniker Guccifer 2.0 claimed credit for breaching the Democratic National Committee.
This blog post presents documents alleged to have originated from the DNC.
Whether or not this posting is part of a Russian Intelligence disinformation campaign, we are exploring the documents’ authenticity and origin.
Regardless, these claims do nothing to lessen our findings relating to the Russian government’s involvement, portions of which we have documented for the public and the greater security community.
There is rarely a dull day at CrowdStrike where we are not detecting or responding to a breach at a company somewhere around the globe.
In all of these cases, we operate under strict confidentiality rules with our customers and cannot reveal publicly any information about these attacks.
But on rare occasions, a customer decides to go public with information about their incident and give us permission to share our knowledge of the adversary tradecraft with the broader community and help protect even those who do not happen to be our customers.
This story is about one of those cases.
CrowdStrike Services Inc., our Incident Response group, was called by the Democratic National Committee (DNC), the formal governing body for the US Democratic Party, to respond to a suspected breach.
We deployed our IR team and technology and immediately identified two sophisticated adversaries on the network – COZY BEAR and FANCY BEAR.
We’ve had lots of experience with both of these actors attempting to target our customers in the past and know them well.
In fact, our team considers them some of the best threat actors out of all the numerous nation-state, criminal and hacktivist/terrorist groups we encounter on a daily basis.
Their tradecraft is superb, operational security second to none and the extensive usage of ‘living-off-the-land’ techniques enables them to easily bypass many security solutions they encounter.
Both adversaries engage in extensive political and economic espionage for the benefit of the government of the Russian Federation and are believed to be closely linked to the Russian government’s powerful and highly capable intelligence services.
COZY BEAR (also referred to in some industry reports as CozyDuke or APT 29) is the adversary group that last year successfully infiltrated the unclassified networks of the White House, State Department, and US Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In addition to the US government, they have targeted organizations across the Defense, Energy, Extractive, Financial, Insurance, Legal, Manufacturing Media, Think Tanks, Pharmaceutical, Research and Technology industries, along with Universities.
Victims have also been observed in Western Europe, Brazil, China, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, South Korea, Turkey and Central Asian countries.
COZY BEAR’s preferred intrusion method is a broadly targeted spearphish campaign that typically includes web links to a malicious dropper.
Once executed on the machine, the code will deliver one of a number of sophisticated Remote Access Tools (RATs), including AdobeARM, ATI-Agent, and MiniDionis.
On many occasions, both the dropper and the payload will contain a range of techniques to ensure the sample is not being analyzed on a virtual machine, using a debugger, or located within a sandbox.
They have extensive checks for the various security software that is installed on the system and their specific configurations.
When specific versions are discovered that may cause issues for the RAT, it promptly exits.
These actions demonstrate a well-resourced adversary with a thorough implant-testing regime that is highly attuned to slight configuration issues that may result in their detection, and which would cause them to deploy a different tool instead.
The implants are highly configurable via encrypted configuration files, which allow the adversary to customize various components, including C2 servers, the list of initial tasks to carry out, persistence mechanisms, encryption keys and others.
An HTTP protocol with encrypted payload is used for the Command & Control communication.
FANCY BEAR (also known as Sofacy or APT 28) is a separate Russian-based threat actor, which has been active since mid 2000s, and has been responsible for targeted intrusion campaigns against the Aerospace, Defense, Energy, Government and Media sectors.
Their victims have been identified in the United States, Western Europe, Brazil, Canada, China, Georgia, Iran, Japan, Malaysia and South Korea.
This adversary has a wide range of implants at their disposal, which have been developed over the course of many years and include Sofacy, X-Agent, X-Tunnel, WinIDS, Foozer and DownRage droppers, and even malware for Linux, OSX, IOS, Android and Windows Phones.
This group is known for its technique of registering domains that closely resemble domains of legitimate organizations they plan to target.
Afterwards, they establish phishing sites on these domains that spoof the look and feel of the victim’s web-based email services in order to steal their credentials.
FANCY BEAR has also been linked publicly to intrusions into the German Bundestag and France’s TV5 Monde TV station in April 2015.
At DNC, COZY BEAR intrusion has been identified going back to summer of 2015, while FANCY BEAR separately breached the network in April 2016.
We have identified no collaboration between the two actors, or even an awareness of one by the other.
Instead, we observed the two Russian espionage groups compromise the same systems and engage separately in the theft of identical credentials.
While you would virtually never see Western intelligence agencies going after the same target without de-confliction for fear of compromising each other’s operations, in Russia this is not an uncommon scenario.
Not only do they have overlapping areas of responsibility, but also rarely share intelligence and even occasionally steal sources from each other and compromise operations.
Thus, it is not surprising to see them engage in intrusions against the same victim, even when it may be a waste of resources and lead to the discovery and potential compromise of mutual operations.
The Powershell backdoor is ingenious in its simplicity and power.
It consists of a single obfuscated command setup to run persistently, such as:
This one-line powershell command, stored only in WMI database, establishes an encrypted connection to C2 and downloads additional powershell modules from it, executing them in memory.
In theory, the additional modules can do virtually anything on the victim system.
The encryption keys in the script were different on every system.
Powershell version of credential theft tool MimiKatz was also used by the actors to facilitate credential acquisition for lateral movement purposes.
FANCY BEAR adversary used different tradecraft, deploying X-Agent malware with capabilities to do remote command execution, file transmission and keylogging.
It was executed via rundll32 commands such as:
In addition, FANCY BEAR’s X-Tunnel network tunneling tool, which facilitates connections to NAT-ed environments, was used to also execute remote commands.
Both tools were deployed via RemCOM, an open-source replacement for PsExec available from GitHub.
They also engaged in a number of anti-forensic analysis measures, such as periodic event log clearing (via wevtutil cl System  and wevtutil cl Security  commands) and resetting timestamps of files.
Intelligence collection directed by nation state actors against US political targets provides invaluable insight into the requirements directed upon those actors.
Regardless of the agency or unit tasked with this collection, the upcoming US election, and the associated candidates and parties are of critical interest to both hostile and friendly nation states.
The 2016 presidential election has the world’s attention, and leaders of other states are anxiously watching and planning for possible outcomes.
Attacks against electoral candidates and the parties they represent are likely to continue up until the election in November.
Interested in learning more about CrowdStrike’s Falcon platform?
Sign up now to receive the latest notifications and updates from CrowdStrike.
Detect, prevent, and respond to attacks— even malware-free intrusions—at any stage, with next-generation endpoint protection.
