In 2013, together with our partner CrySyS  Lab, we announced our research on a new APT actor we  dubbed “Miniduke”.
It stood out from the “APT bunch” for several reasons,  including:
We have pointed out that this threat actor  used malware developed using “old-school” virus writing techniques and habits.
Our analysis was continued later by researchers from  CIRCL/Luxembourg and several other AV companies.
Recently, we became aware of an  F-Secure publication on the same topic (under the name  “CosmicDuke”).
In the wake of our publications from 2013, the Miniduke campaigns  have stopped or at least decreased in intensity.
However, in the beginning of  2014 they resumed attacks in full force, once again grabbing our attention.
We believe it’s time  to uncover more information on their operations.
The old style Miniduke implants from 2013  are still around and being used during the current campaigns.
It still relies on  Twitter accounts which contain a hardcoded C&C URL pointing to the command  and control server.
One such account was the following, observed in February  2014:
Although the format of the C&C URL was changed from previous variants, the encoding algorithm is the same.
The line above can be decoded into the full C&C URL:
This decoded URL was an active C&C, from which several updates have been collected:
This Trojan is  a large package, due to the use of a custom packer.
The bundle has a specific  debug string inside:
The package executes  a smaller Trojan module:
Another update  that has been observed on the C&C server was:
We have observed another similar Trojan, although not on the C&Cs directly:
The use of the Nemesis Gemina packer in the Miniduke payloads made us look for further samples in our collection.
This led us to several new findings.
After the 2013 exposure, the actor behind  Miniduke appears to have switched to using another custom backdoor, capable of  stealing various types of information.
The malware spoofs  popular applications designed to run in the background, including file  information, icons and even file size:
The main “new” Miniduke backdoor (aka  TinyBaron or CosmicDuke) is compiled using a customizable framework called  “BotGenStudio”, which has flexibility to enable/disable components  when the bot is constructed.
The components can be divided into 3 groups
Miniduke/CosmicDuke is capable of starting via Windows Task Scheduler, via a customized service binary that spawns a new process set in the special registry key, or is launched when the user is away and the screensaver is activated.
The malware can steal a variety of information, including files based on extensions and file name keywords:
Note: we believe the “*sifr*” and “*sifer*”  keywords above refer to the transliteration of the English word “Cypher” in  some languages.
Also, the backdoor  has many other capabilities including:
The malware implements several methods to  exfiltrate information, including uploading data via FTP and three variants of  HTTP-based communication mechanisms.
A number of different HTTP connectors act  as helpers, trying various methods in case one of them is restricted by local  security policies or security software.
Each victim is assigned a unique ID, making  it possible to push specific updates to an individual victim.
As we noted,  Miniduke/CosmicDuke is protected with a custom obfuscated loader which heavily  consumes CPU resources for 3-5 minutes before passing execution to the payload.
This not only complicates analysis of the malware but is also used to drain  resources reserved for execution in emulators integrated in security software.
Besides its own obfuscator, it makes heavy use of encryption and compression  based on the RC4 and LZRW algorithms respectively.
Implementations of these algorithms have tiny differences from the standardized  code which perhaps looks like a mistake in the code.
Nevertheless, we believe  that these changes were introduced on purpose to mislead researchers.
One of the more technically advanced parts  of Miniduke is the data storage.
The internal configuration of the malware is  encrypted, compressed and serialized as a complicated registry-like structure  which has various record types including strings, integers and internal  references.
In addition, Miniduke  uses an unusual method to store the exfiltrated data.
When a file is uploaded  to the C&C server it is split into small chunks (~3KB), which are  compressed, encrypted and placed in a container to be uploaded to the server.
If the source file is large enough it may be placed into several hundred different  containers that are uploaded independently.
These data chunks are probably parsed,  decrypted, unpacked, extracted and reassembled on the attacker’ side.
This  method is used to upload screenshots made on the victim’s machine.
Creating  such a complicated storage might be an overhead; however, all those layers of  additional processing guarantees that very few researchers will get to the  original data while offering an increased reliability against network errors.
Based on our analysis, the victims of  Miniduke and CosmicDuke fall into these categories:
From one of the  old style Miniduke servers we were able to extract a list of victims and their  corresponding countries.
We were able to identify victims in three of these countries which belonged to the “government”  category.
Here’s the list of countries affected:
One of the CosmicDuke  servers we analyzed had a long list of victims dating back to April 2012.
This  server had 265 unique identifiers assigned to victims from 139 unique IPs.
Geographical distribution of the victims was as follows (top10):
According to our analysis, the attackers were more interested in  expanding their operations and scanned IP ranges and servers in Azerbaijan, Greece and Ukraine.
During the analysis, we were able to obtain  a copy of one of the CosmicDuke command and control servers.
It appears it was  also used for other operations by the group members, including hacking into  other servers on the internet.
The attackers have deployed a number of  publicly available hacking tools on this server in order to scan and compromise  websites of victim organizations as well as collect information for future  targeted attacks.
Here is the  list of hacking tools found on the server:
Hydra: “A very fast  network logon cracker which support many different services”
Fierce2: “A semi-lightweight  enumeration scanner that helps penetration testers locate non-contiguous IP  space and hostnames for a specified domains using things like DNS, Whois and  ARIN”
The Harvester: “The objective of this program is  to gather emails, subdomains, hosts, employee names, open ports and banners  from different public sources like search engines, PGP key servers and SHODAN  computer database”
RitX: “A Reverse IP  Lookup Tool that will allows you to use an IP address or domain name to  identify all currently domains hosted on a server using multiple services and  various techniques”
Ncrack: “High-speed  network authentication cracking tool.
It allows for rapid, yet reliable  large-scale auditing of multiple hosts”
Sqlmap: “An open  source penetration testing tool that automates the process of detecting and  exploiting SQL injection flaws and taking over of database servers”
WPScan: “A black box  WordPress vulnerability scanner”
Note: tool descriptions were copied from their  public websites
Although the  attackers use English in several places, indicating knowledge of this language,  there are certain indicators to suggest they are not native English speakers.
The following strings  were discovered in a block of memory appended to the malware component used for  persistence:
www.mirea.ru
e.mail.ru
gmt4
c:documents and settingsвладимирlocal  settings…
The C&C hosts appear to have been compromised by the attackers, which uploaded a specific webshell.




The Miniduke attackers’ webshell on hacked hosts
For the  webshell, it is interesting to point to the use of Codepage 1251, which is  commonly used to render Cyrillic characters.
The password used to protect the  shell, is checked against the MD5 hash “35c7c2d1fe03f0eeaa4630332c242a36“.
(BTW: can you crack it?
It took us some days to solve it!)
Perhaps it is  noteworthy to say that the same webshell has been observed in the operations of  another advanced threat actor known as Turla, Snake or Uroburos.
Another  interesting aspect is the debug path strings from the malware, which indicate  several build environments or groups of “users” of the “Bot Gen Studio”,  “NITRO” and “Nemesis Gemina”:
Based on the  compilation timestamps, we were able to put together the following chart  indicating the activity of the Miniduke/CosmicDuke attackers on a ‘Day of the  Week’ basis:

 

It appears the  attackers follow the Mon-Fri work week, however, they do work on the weekends  from time to time.
In terms of activity  hours, the attackers appear to be working between 6am and 7pm GMT.
Most of the  work is done between 6am and 4pm though.
Conclusions
Although they  stopped or at least decreased in intensity following our announcement last  year, the Miniduke attacks are now back in force.
The old style Miniduke  malware is still being used, deploying previously known stages packed with a  new obfuscator observed with the mysterious “Bot Gen Studio” for the “NITRO”  and “Nemesis Gemina” projects.
While the old  style Miniduke implants were used to target mostly government victims, the new  style CosmicDuke implants have a somehow different typology of victims.
The  most unusual is the targeting of individuals that appear to be involved in the  traffic and reselling of controlled and illegal substances, such as steroids  and hormones.
These victims in the NITRO project have been observed only in  Russia.
One possibility is that “Bot Gen Studio” is a malware platform also  available as a so-called “legal spyware” tool, similar to others, such as  HackingTeam’s RCS, widely used by law enforcement agencies.
Another possibility  is that it’s simply available in the underground and purchased by various  competitors in the pharmaceutical business to spy on each other.
At the same  time, the “Nemesis Gemina” project focuses on government, diplomatic, energy, military  and telecom operators.
One of the big questions here is: Are the  Miniduke attackers still “elite”?
Though the old malware is still in use, the  new malware is no longer pure assembler; instead, it’s written in C/C++.
The new samples of  Miniduke/CosmicDuke use a powerful obfuscator.
For almost all of the samples we  analyzed, it jumps to the beginning of dynamic PE loader – always from the same  “l33t” address (if memory layout allowed it during the bot  construction):




Hence, you could say that CosmicDuke is still “l33t”!
It appears the  attackers follow the Mon-Fri work week, however, they do work on the weekends  from time to time.
In terms of activity  hours, the attackers appear to be working between 6am and 7pm GMT.
Most of the  work is done between 6am and 4pm though.
Although they  stopped or at least decreased in intensity following our announcement last  year, the Miniduke attacks are now back in force.
The old style Miniduke  malware is still being used, deploying previously known stages packed with a  new obfuscator observed with the mysterious “Bot Gen Studio” for the “NITRO”  and “Nemesis Gemina” projects.
While the old  style Miniduke implants were used to target mostly government victims, the new  style CosmicDuke implants have a somehow different typology of victims.
The  most unusual is the targeting of individuals that appear to be involved in the  traffic and reselling of controlled and illegal substances, such as steroids  and hormones.
These victims in the NITRO project have been observed only in  Russia.
One possibility is that “Bot Gen Studio” is a malware platform also  available as a so-called “legal spyware” tool, similar to others, such as  HackingTeam’s RCS, widely used by law enforcement agencies.
Another possibility  is that it’s simply available in the underground and purchased by various  competitors in the pharmaceutical business to spy on each other.
At the same  time, the “Nemesis Gemina” project focuses on government, diplomatic, energy, military  and telecom operators.
One of the big questions here is: Are the  Miniduke attackers still “elite”?
Though the old malware is still in use, the  new malware is no longer pure assembler; instead, it’s written in C/C++.
The new samples of  Miniduke/CosmicDuke use a powerful obfuscator.
For almost all of the samples we  analyzed, it jumps to the beginning of dynamic PE loader – always from the same  “l33t” address (if memory layout allowed it during the bot  construction):
Hence, you could say that CosmicDuke is still “l33t”!
Miniduke is back: Nemesis Gemina and the Botgen Studio
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked *
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
Notify me when new comments are added.
Interesting!, glad Kaspersky shared this info right here!
The hottest research right in your inbox
While investigating a recent rise of attacks against Exchange servers, we noticed a recurring cluster of activity that appeared in several distinct compromised networks.
With a long-standing operation, high profile victims, advanced toolset and no affinity to a known threat actor, we decided to dub the cluster GhostEmperor.
We discovered a campaign delivering the Tomiris backdoor that shows a number of similarities with the Sunshuttle malware distributed by DarkHalo APT and target overlaps with Kazuar.
This is our latest summary of advanced persistent threat (APT) activity, focusing on significant events that we observed during Q2 2021: attacks against Microsoft Exchange servers, APT29 and APT31 activities, targeting campaigns, etc.
We recently came across unusual APT activity that was detected in high volumes, albeit most likely aimed at a few targets of interest.
Further analysis revealed that the actor, which we dubbed LuminousMoth, shows an affinity to the HoneyMyte group, otherwise known as Mustang Panda.
The hottest research right in your inbox
© 2021 AO Kaspersky Lab.
Registered trademarks and service marks are the property of their respective owners.
The hottest research right in your inbox
