More than 6,500 stores have been compromised, but the number could be around 20,000.
Hackers have breached the infrastructure of Volusion, a provider of cloud-hosted online stores, and are delivering malicious code that records and steals payment card details entered by users in online forms.
More than 6,500 stores are impacted, but the number could be even higher.
In a press release published last month, Volusion claimed it had more than 20,000 customers.
The most notable compromise is the Sesame Street Live online store, which has been taken down earlier today after another journalist reached out.
At the time of writing, the malicious code is still on Volusion's servers and is still being delivered to all of the company's client stores.
Volusion has not returned emails or phone calls from this reporter, nor from security researchers from Check Point and Trend Micro.
Cyber-security firm RiskIQ is also tracking the incident and confirmed the hack to ZDNet.
We sent you a Direct Message.
Looking forward to your reply.
The incident took place this week after hackers gained access to Volusion's Google Cloud infrastructure, where they modified a JavaScript file and included malicious code that logs card details entered in online forms.
Volusion is a known Google Cloud Platform customers.
The compromised file is hosted at https://storage.googleapis.com/volusionapi/resources.js [copy], and is loaded on Volusion-based online stores via the /a/j/vnav.js file.
For users interested in the inner workings of this code, Check Point security researcher Marcel Afrahim published an analysis on Medium earlier today.
The incident is what cyber-security experts call a Magecart attack or web card skimming, where crooks steal payment card details from online shops, rather than ATMs.
These types of hacks have been happening for years, but they've intensified over the past two.
In a report published last week, RiskIQ said Magecart attacks have reached a peak, with card-stealing scripts (called skimmers) being spotted on more than 18,000 websites over the past few months.
Most Magecart attacks take place when hackers use vulnerabilities in self-hosted stores to plant skimmer code on outdated online shops.
But, sometimes, hackers also manage to breach cloud-based platforms -- like Volusion -- or companies that provide widgets, analytics, ads, or other secondary services to online stores.
Something like the latter case happened in May when hackers breached the cloud infrastructure for seven companies that provided services to online stores -- namely Alpaca Forms, Picreel, AppLixir, RYVIU, OmniKick, eGain, and AdMaxim.
The May incidents were traced to those companies' misconfigured cloud-hosting accounts, which allowed hackers to modify existing files without permission.
Similar attacks followed over the summer, and in most, hackers targeted misconfigured Amazon Web Services accounts.
The Volusion incident that's currently underway is the first one traced back to Google Cloud.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
