In September-October 2019, hackers planted malware to steal card data from 6,589 online stores.
Card data stolen last year from Volusion-hosted online stores has surfaced on the dark web, Gemini Advisory, a threat intel firm specialized in fraud detection, reported today.
The stolen card data relates to a security breach that ZDNet reported last year, in October 2019.
At the time, hackers breached the servers of Volusion, a Shopify-like platform that provides hosting for online stores.
Hackers breached one of the company's servers and placed malicious JavaScript code that was eventually loaded on some of the company's customer stores.
The malicious code, as analyzed and confirmed by multiple parties, recorded payment card details entered entered in checkout forms.
The Volusion hack was discovered on October 8, 2019, but Gemini researchers said today in a report shared with ZDNet that the breach dated back to a month earlier, on September 7.
Furthermore, researchers also said they found the malicious code to only 6,589 of Volusion's stores, reducing the impact of the breach's initially reported size of 20,000 potentially impacted stores.
However, while the breach was smaller, it wasn't less impactful.
Gemini Advisory said today the stolen card data was uploaded a month later, in November 2019, on a dark web hacking forum where it has been up for sale ever since.
Gemini Advisory said it suspects that hackers might have gotten their hands on almost 20 million payment card details during last year's hack, but, for now, it only tracked 239,000 Card Not Present (CNP) records back to Volusion-based stores.
Some of the card details have been sold, Gemini said, estimating that the hackers made nearly $1.6 million in revenue.
In subsequent report following ZDNet's coverage, Trend Micro later attributed the hack to a group known as FIN6, also believed to have been behind other web-skimming (Magecart) incidents, such as British Airways and retail giant Newegg.
A Volusion representative was not immediately available for comment.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
