An official website of the United States government Here's how you know
This Alert uses the MITRE Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge (ATT&CK®) framework.
See the ATT&CK for Enterprise framework for all referenced threat actor techniques.
This product was written by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and the Multi-State Information Sharing & Analysis Center (MS-ISAC).
Emotet—a sophisticated Trojan commonly functioning as a downloader or dropper of other malware—resurged in July 2020, after a dormant period that began in February.
Since August, CISA and MS-ISAC have seen a significant increase in malicious cyber actors targeting state and local governments with Emotet phishing emails.
This increase has rendered Emotet one of the most prevalent ongoing threats.
To secure against Emotet, CISA and MS-ISAC recommend implementing the mitigation measures described in this Alert, which include applying protocols that block suspicious attachments, using antivirus software, and blocking suspicious IPs.
Emotet is difficult to combat because of its “worm-like” features that enable network-wide infections.
Additionally, Emotet uses modular Dynamic Link Libraries to continuously evolve and update its capabilities.
Since July 2020, CISA has seen increased activity involving Emotet-associated indicators.
During that time, CISA’s EINSTEIN Intrusion Detection System, which protects federal, civilian executive branch networks, has detected roughly 16,000 alerts related to Emotet activity.
CISA observed Emotet being executed in phases during possible targeted campaigns.
Emotet used compromised Word documents (.doc) attached to phishing emails as initial insertion vectors.
Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 7.0; Windows NT 6.1; WOW64; Trident/7.0; SLCC2; .NET CLR 2.0.50727; .NET CLR 3.5.30729; .NET CLR 3.0.30729; Media Center PC 6.0; .NET4.0C; .NET4.0E; InfoPath.3; .NET CLR
Traffic to known Emotet-related domains or IPs occurred most commonly over ports 80, 8080, and 443.
In one instance, traffic from an Emotet-related IP attempted to connect to a suspected compromised site over port 445, possibly indicating the use of Server Message Block exploitation frameworks along with Emotet (Exploitation of Remote Services [T1210]).
Figure 1 lays out Emotet’s use of enterprise techniques.
Figure 1: MITRE ATT&CK enterprise techniques used by Emotet
The following timeline identifies key Emotet activity observed in 2020.
According to MITRE, Emotet uses the ATT&CK techniques listed in table 1.
Table 1: Common exploit tools
OS Credential Dumping: LSASS Memory [T1003.001]
Emotet has been observed dropping password grabber modules including Mimikatz.
Remote Services: SMB/Windows Admin Shares [T1021.002]
Emotet leverages the Admin$ share for lateral movement once the local admin password has been brute forced.
Obfuscated Files or Information [T1027]
Emotet has obfuscated macros within malicious documents to hide the URLs hosting the malware, cmd.exe arguments, and PowerShell scripts.
Obfuscated Files or Information: Software Packing [T1027.002]
Emotet has used custom packers to protect its payloads.
Emotet has been observed to hook network APIs to monitor network traffic.
Exfiltration Over C2 Channel [T1041]
Emotet has been seen exfiltrating system information stored within cookies sent within a HTTP GET request back to its command and control (C2) servers.
Emotet has used WMI to execute powershell.exe.
Process Injection: Dynamic-link Library Injection [T1055.001]
Emotet has been observed injecting in to Explorer.exe and other processes.
Emotet has been observed enumerating local processes.
Command and Scripting Interpreter: PowerShell [T1059.001]
Emotet has used Powershell to retrieve the malicious payload and download additional resources like Mimikatz.
Command and Scripting Interpreter: Windows Command Shell [T1059.003]
Emotet has used cmd.exe to run a PowerShell script.
Command and Scripting Interpreter: Visual Basic [T1059.005]
Emotet has sent Microsoft Word documents with embedded macros that will invoke scripts to download additional payloads.
Valid Accounts: Local Accounts [T1078.003]
Emotet can brute force a local admin password, then use it to facilitate lateral movement.
Account Discovery: Email Account [T1087.003]
Emotet has been observed leveraging a module that can scrape email addresses from Outlook.
Brute Force: Password Guessing [T1110.001]
Emotet has been observed using a hard-coded list of passwords to brute force user accounts.
Email Collection: Local Email Collection [T1114.001]
Emotet has been observed leveraging a module that scrapes email data from Outlook.
User Execution: Malicious Link [T1204.001]
Emotet has relied upon users clicking on a malicious link delivered through spearphishing.
User Execution: Malicious File [T1204.002]
Emotet has relied upon users clicking on a malicious attachment delivered through spearphishing.
Exploitation of Remote Services [T1210]
Emotet has been seen exploiting SMB via a vulnerability exploit like ETERNALBLUE (MS17-010) to achieve lateral movement and propagation.
Create or Modify System Process: Windows Service [T1543.003]
Emotet has been observed creating new services to maintain persistence.
Boot or Logon Autostart Execution: Registry Run Keys / Startup Folder [T1547.001]
Emotet has been observed adding the downloaded payload to the HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run key to maintain persistence.
Scheduled Task/Job: Scheduled Task [T1053.005]
Emotet has maintained persistence through a scheduled task.
Unsecured Credentials: Credentials In Files [T1552.001]
Emotet has been observed leveraging a module that retrieves passwords stored on a system for the current logged-on user.
Credentials from Password Stores: Credentials from Web Browsers [T1555.003]
Emotet has been observed dropping browser password grabber modules.
Emotet has been observed encrypting the data it collects before sending it to the C2 server.
Emotet has been delivered by phishing emails containing attachments.
Emotet has been delivered by phishing emails containing links.
Emotet has used HTTP over ports such as 20, 22, 7080, and 50000, in addition to using ports commonly associated with HTTP/Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure.
Encrypted Channel: Asymmetric Cryptography [T1573.002]
Emotet is known to use RSA keys for encrypting C2 traffic.
MS-ISAC developed the following Snort signature for use in detecting network activity associated with Emotet activity.
(chrome|firefox|safari|opera|ie|edge) passwords/i"; reference:url,cofense.com/flash-bulletin-emotet-epoch-1-changes-c2-communication/; sid:1; rev:2;)
CISA developed the following Snort signatures for use in detecting network activity associated with Emotet activity.
Note: Uniform Resource Identifiers should contain a random length alphabetical multiple directory string, and activity will likely be over ports 80, 8080, or 443.
CISA and MS-ISAC recommend that network defenders—in federal, state, local, tribal, territorial governments, and the private sector—consider applying the following best practices to strengthen the security posture of their organization's systems.
System owners and administrators should review any configuration changes prior to implementation to avoid unwanted impacts.
For additional information on malware incident prevention and handling, see the National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-83, Guide to Malware Incident Prevention and Handling for Desktops and Laptops.
This product is provided subject to this Notification and this Privacy & Use policy.
We recently updated our anonymous product survey; we'd welcome your feedback.
Receive security alerts, tips, and other updates.
CISA is part of the Department of Homeland Security
