Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
During the 76 days since Emotet’s return, researchers have observed activity reminiscent of past Emotet campaigns, like high message volumes and global distribution.
Emotet uses a variety of lure themes, some of which occasionally leverage current events or news items, like COVID-19 or Greta Thunberg.
While TA542, the actor behind Emotet, has sent messages to local, state, and other government recipients, historically they have not directly leveraged political themes in their messaging.
On October 1, 2020, we observed thousands of Emotet email messages with the subject “Team Blue Take Action” sent to hundreds of organizations in the US.
The message body is taken directly from a page on the Democratic National Committee's website, with the addition of a line requesting that the recipient open the attached document.
Attached is a malicious Word document, “Team Blue Take Action.” The Word doc contains macros which, if enabled by the intended recipient, will download and install Emotet.
The current second stage payload we’ve observed following Emotet is Qbot "partner01" and The Trick "morXXX" (e.g., "mor125").
Figure 1: ”Team Blue Take Action” lure containing malicious Word doc attachment
Sample of additional related subjects observed includes:
Sample of additional related filenames observed includes:
The shift to using politically themed lures comes days after the first of several 2020 US Presidential debates.
The debate received widespread media coverage, and as Election Day draws nearer, many voters are likely feeling compelled to volunteer for political causes or for the election in some way.
However, it’s unlikely that this shift is driven by any specific political ideology.
Like earlier use of COVID-19 or Greta Thunberg lure themes, TA542 is attempting to reach as many intended recipients as possible by capitalizing on a popular topic.
"Team Blue Take Action.doc" document SHA256: 21cda873bff60530ae094d7906219b5c0cc5d98e808f8608962886683fc37504
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
