Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Bank of America insider charged with money laundering for BEC scams
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The internal networks of Lithuania's National Center for Public Health (NVSC) and several municipalities have been infected with Emotet malware following a large campaign targeting the country's state institutions.
"When infected recipients opened infected messages, the virus entered the internal networks of the institutions," NVSC officials said in a statement published today.
"Infected computers, after downloading additional files, began sending fake emails or engaging in other types of malicious activity."
Lithuanian government officials, ministry representatives, and epidemiological diagnostics experts that have previously been contacted by NVSC specialists via email have all received Emotet-infected emails from infected systems.
The NVSC e-mail systems have been temporarily shut down on Tuesday to stop the further spread of the virus.
NVSC information technology specialists, together with experts from the Central State Telecommunications Center and the National Cyber ​​Security Center currently working on cleaning affected systems of the Emotet infection, as well as on recovering NVSC e-mails and restoring email access.
Rytis Rainys, Director of the Lithuanian National Cyber ​​Security Center (NKSC), warned that the Emotet emails sent as replies to previous conversations distributed malicious code using password-protected archives as attachments, with the password shared in the email body.
This prevented anti-malware solutions from detecting the malicious emails which made it possible for the targeted individuals to open the attachment and infect themselves.
Stealing reply-chain emails is a known Emotet tactic used to camouflage malicious emails as parts of existing conversations for higher credibility and better infection rates in future spam campaigns.
The tactic is also being used by the Qbot trojan, and it was previously by the Gozi ISFB banking trojan and the URSNIF information-stealing trojan.
This is the second large Emotet campaign that has targeted Lithuania this year, with a previous one detected by the NKSC in October.
The NKSC published an advisory at the time recommending potential targets (including but not limited to state institutions and companies) to enable and properly configure Sender Policy Framework (SPF) email authentication.
After a break of a month and a half, the Emotet botnet was revived on December 21st [1, 2], and Microsoft spotted an ongoing campaign delivering "a wide range of lures in massive volumes of emails, the use of fake replies or forwarded emails, password-protected archive attachments."
"The new Emotet campaign still uses documents that contain malicious macro that, when enabled, connects to seven malicious domains to download the Emotet payload," Microsoft Security Intelligence tweeted.
Emotet was first spotted in 2014 as a banking Trojan and has now evolved into a botnet used by the TA542 threat group (aka Mummy Spider) to deploy second-stage malware payloads on infected systems.
The payloads Emotet drops on compromised computers include the QakBot and Trickbot (which also deploys both Ryuk and Conti ransomware) trojans.
Before going on a break, Emotet has targeted multiple US state and local governments in potentially targeted campaigns according to an advisory published by DHS-CISA in October.
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Vidar stealer abuses Mastodon to silently get C2 configuration
New UEFI bootkit used to backdoor Windows devices since 2012
Flubot Android malware now spreads via fake security updates
New Tomiris backdoor likely developed by SolarWinds hackers
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
