We offer flexibility to our customers with a full set of deployment and purchasing options.
We offer flexibility to our customers with a full set of deployment and purchasing options.
Howdy, and welcome to the ThreatConnect Research Roundup, a collection of recent findings by our Research Team and items from open source publications that have resulted in Observations of related indicators across ThreatConnect’s CAL™ (Collective Analytics Layer).
Note: Viewing the pages linked in this blog post requires a ThreatConnect account.
If you don’t have one, please click here to request your free TC Open account.
Roundup Highlight: Suspected Naikon DGA Domains
Naikon related intelligence in ThreatConnect Common Community
Our highlight in this week’s Roundup is Incident 20200519B: Suspected Naikon DGAs.
After reviewing research published by Check Point and Kaspersky, our team identified additional suspected Naikon DGA domains consistent with registration and hosting data of previously identified Naikon domains:
Additional domains identified based on registration and hosting consistencies:
We don’t have any information on the extent to which, if any, these domains have been used maliciously.
However, given the commonalities identified, these domains merit scrutiny as possible Naikon DGA domains.
To receive ThreatConnect notifications about any of the above, remember to check the “Follow Item” box on that item’s Details page.
These are items recently created or updated in the ThreatConnect Common Community by our Research Team.
They include threat actor profiles, malware families, campaigns, signatures, and incidents based on our research and threat hunting activities.
]support was registered using jirajira@cock[.]li.
This domain is hosted on a probable dedicated server at 185.10.68[.
]163, has switched to using its own name server, and hosts a mail-in-a-box server.
At this time we don’t have any information indicating the extent to which these domains have been used maliciously.
Technical Blogs and Reports Incidents with Active and Observed Indicators:
The ThreatConnect Technical Blogs and Reports Source is a curated collection of open source blogs and reports that are automatically aggregated and parsed for Indicators on a daily basis.
Incidents listed here are associated to one or more Indicators with an Active status and at least one global Observation across the ThreatConnect community.
These analytics are provided by ThreatConnect’s CAL™ (Collective Analytics Layer).
Suite 550
Arlington, VA 22203
Directions
Toll Free: +1.800.965.2708
Local: +1.703.229.4240
Fax: +1.703.229.4489
By Industry
By Role
By Need
How to Buy
About
Leadership
Methodology
Research Team
Careers
Learn More
Knowledge Base
Github Repository
15 Bishopsgate
London, EC2N 3AR
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 208 138 8482
Bloc F, Etaj 1
The Office
Bulevardul 21 Decembrie 1989
400124
Cluj Napoca
Romania
©2012- 2021 ThreatConnect, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy | Sitemap | Terms of Service
To give you the easiest possible experience, this site uses cookies.
Find out more about our Privacy Policy and Cookie Policy.
By continuing to use this site, you are giving us your consent to do this.
We may request cookies to be set on your device.
We use cookies to let us know when you visit our websites, how you interact with us, to enrich your user experience, and to customize your relationship with our website.
Click on the different category headings to find out more.
You can also change some of your preferences.
Note that blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience on our websites and the services we are able to offer.
These cookies are strictly necessary to provide you with services available through our website and to use some of its features.
Because these cookies are strictly necessary to deliver the website, refuseing them will have impact how our site functions.
You always can block or delete cookies by changing your browser settings and force blocking all cookies on this website.
But this will always prompt you to accept/refuse cookies when revisiting our site.
We fully respect if you want to refuse cookies but to avoid asking you again and again kindly allow us to store a cookie for that.
You are free to opt out any time or opt in for other cookies to get a better experience.
If you refuse cookies we will remove all set cookies in our domain.
We provide you with a list of stored cookies on your computer in our domain so you can check what we stored.
Due to security reasons we are not able to show or modify cookies from other domains.
You can check these in your browser security settings.
We also use different external services like Google Webfonts, Google Maps, and external Video providers.
Since these providers may collect personal data like your IP address we allow you to block them here.
Please be aware that this might heavily reduce the functionality and appearance of our site.
Changes will take effect once you reload the page.
Vimeo and Youtube video embeds:
