MyCERT security alert points the finger at APT40, a Chinese state-sponsored hacking crew.


                        Cyberwar and the Future of Cybersecurity
Today's security threats have expanded in scope and seriousness.
There can now be millions -- or even billions -- of dollars at risk when information security isn't handled properly.
A Chinese state-sponsored hacking group has been targeting Malaysian government officials, computer experts with the Malaysian government said on Wednesday.
The purpose of the attacks has been to infect computers of government officials with malware and then steal confidential documents from government networks, Malaysia's Computer Emergency Response Team (MyCERT) said in a security advisory.
The attacks against government officials consist of highly-targeted spear-phishing emails.
MyCERT says the attackers have been pretending to be a journalist, an individual from a trade publication, and representatives for a military organization and non-governmental organization (NGO).
The emails contained links to documents stored on Google Drive.
The documents, when opened, asked recipients to enable macros.
The malicious macros used two Office exploits (CVE-2014-6352 and CVE-2017-0199) to execute malicious code on the victim's system to download and install malware.
"The group's operations tend to target government-sponsored projects and take large amounts of information specific to such projects, including proposals, meetings, financial data, shipping information, plans and drawings, and raw data," MyCERT said.
MyCERT officials didn't say if government officials were compromised in these attacks.
However, while MyCERT didn't accuse the Chinese government directly, their advisory included links to research from the cyber-security community.
The write-ups [1, 2, 3, 4] describe the hacking tools and modus operandi of a cyber-espionage group known as APT40, known for its hacking activity alligned with the interests of the Chinese government.
In an exposé published last month, an online group of cyber-security analysts calling themselves Intrusion Truth have claimed that APT40 are contractors hired and operating under the supervision of the Hainan department of the Chinese Ministry of State Security.
According to FireEye, besides Malaysia, the group has also targeted Cambodia, Belgium, Germany, Hong Kong, Philippines, Norway, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, the United States, and the United Kingdom.
The group has been primarily focused on "engineering, transportation, and the defense industry, especially where these sectors overlap with maritime technologies."
The APT40 group is also tracked by other security firms, but under other names, such as TEMP.Periscope, TEMP.Jumper, Leviathan, BRONZE MOHAWK, GADOLINIUM.
The group has been active since 2014, according to multiple reports.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
