Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The operators of the DoppelPaymer Ransomware have launched a site that they will use to shame victims who do not pay a ransom and to publish any files that were stolen before computers were encrypted.
A new extortion method started by the Maze Ransomware is to steal files before encrypting them and then use them as leverage to get victims to pay the ransom.
If a ransom is not paid, then the ransomware operators release the stolen files on a public 'news' site to expose the victim to government fines, lawsuits, and the risk of the attack being classified as a data breach.
Soon after starting this tactic, other ransomware families including Sodinokibi, Nemty, and DoppelPaymer have stated that they would begin this practice as well.
Today, the operators of the DoppelPaymer Ransomware have followed in Maze's footsteps and launched a site called 'Dopple Leaks' that will be used to leak files and shame non-paying victims.
DoppelPaymer is an enterprise-targeting ransomware that compromises a corporate network, eventually gains access to admin credentials, and then deploys the ransomware on the network to encrypt all devices.
As these attacks encrypt hundreds, if not thousands, of devices, they tend to have a huge impact on operators and the attackers demand a very large ransom.
The ransomware operators state they have created this site as a threat to victims that if they do not pay, their data and names will be leaked by the attackers.
The ransomware operators have told BleepingComputer that this new site is in "test mode" and is currently being used mostly for shaming their victims and to publish a few files that were stolen from victims.
Currently listed on this page are four companies that DoppelPaymer claims to have encrypted and who did not pay the ransom.
Other than Pemex, BleepingComputer will only share descriptions of the other listed companies and the demanded ransoms that were shared with us by the DoppelPaymer operators.
Of all the sites, DoppelPaymer told us that they only stole a large amount of "still unsorted" files from Pemex.
For the other three companies, they only stole a few files because there was "nothing interesting" or because "it was not our goal".
They stated that they do plan on performing more data exfiltration now that this site has been created.
BleepingComputer has repeatedly stated that ransomware attacks have to be treated like data breaches.
For years, it is has been a well-known secret that ransomware attackers are looking through and stealing victim's files before encrypting computers and then threatening to release them.
It was not until recently, though, that ransomware operators have followed through with their threats.
Now that they are doing so and more ransomware operators are getting on board, companies need to be transparent about the data theft and treat these attacks like data breaches.
This is because it is not only corporate data being stolen, but also vendor and client data and the personal information of employees.
Transparency is more important now than ever and hiding these attacks is putting their employees at long-term risk as their data is exposed to identity theft and fraud.
Trucking giant Forward Air reports ransomware data breach
United Health Centers ransomware attack claimed by Vice Society
Ransomware gang threatens to wipe decryption key if negotiator hired
REvil ransomware is back in full attack mode and leaking data
The Week in Ransomware - September 10th 2021 - REvil returns
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
