
          By Anna Chung and Swetha Balla
September 15, 2021 at 6:00 AM
Tags: COVID-19, Cybercrime, Dridex, identity theft, malware, Phishing, ransomware, tourism
This post is also available in: 
    日本語 (Japanese)
Threat actors have always been adept at keeping abreast of worldwide trends – ranging from geopolitical to technical – and rapidly exploiting these trends for their benefit.
The current pandemic is no exception.
Unit 42 has previously reported on how cybercriminals have preyed on consumers during COVID-19 and on the use of COVID-19 themed phishing attacks impersonating brands like Pfizer and BioNTech.
This article provides early warnings for the travel industry and global travelers by sharing information about various attack attempts targeting the travel industry.
At the beginning of the pandemic, when people all over the world scrambled to get protective supplies – personal protective equipment, sanitizer and toilet paper – threat actors tried to take advantage of supply issues by selling fake products.
They also tried to trick people by purporting to be credible health organizations (such as the WHO) or pharmaceutical companies, all while the actual organizations and companies were trying to make sense of the virus and come up with metrics, protective measures and vaccines.
Although the pandemic is not over, as the world opens up borders and the vaccines slow down the spread of the virus, people who have been cooped up at home are eager to travel.
Threat actors are taking advantage of this trend by using travel as a theme for phishing people and stealing data – account credentials, financial information and so on – subsequently selling this data in underground markets.
Here, we first show that there has been a substantial increase in the registration of travel-related phishing URLs in 2021.
Second, we provide two real-life examples demonstrating attackers abusing the travel theme, including the Dridex malware distribution and the abuse of Firebase in phishing campaigns.
Third, we talk about how threat actors use various data that they steal.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of best practices for both individuals and organizations.
Please note that Palo Alto Networks Next-Generation Firewall customers are protected from phishing attacks with various security services, including Advanced URL Filtering and WildFire.
To conduct social engineering, threat actors have always leveraged malicious domains and URLs impersonating known brands and websites familiar to end users.
The content served on these malicious domains or URLs is crafted to mislead end users, since they look and feel very similar to brands that users know.
Alternatively, threat actors also send phishing emails to end users to trick them into either downloading malicious attachments or clicking on links that lead to malicious content – website pages or attachments.
Threat actors use themes that invoke a sense of urgency (such as outstanding invoices) or appeal to the end user emotionally (such as travel-themed emails sent as the world opens up).
Unit 42 analyzed travel-themed phishing URLs created between October 2019 and August 2021.
As seen in Figure 1 below, there is a gradual upward trend in the registration of phishing URLs starting early 2021, with a significant increase in June 2021.
Though the new phishing URLs did not continue to be registered at quite the frenzied rate we saw in June, throughout the summer, threat actors created new travel-themed phishing URLs at a much higher level than at any time in 2020.
Based on the new phishing URLs that Unit 42 observed, in addition to the use of bespoke/new domains for serving the phishing URLs, threat actors also leveraged URL shorteners such as bit.ly and bit.do, and services such as Firebase that are hosted on Google Cloud Storage.
Firebase is backed by Google and supports developers of mobile or web applications.
Firebase includes cloud storage that enables developers to store and serve user-generated content.
As Firebase leverages Google Cloud Storage, it is possible for phishing URLs to take advantage of it to bypass email protections based on Google’s reputation.
Unit 42 observed that not all the phishing URLs that threat actors leveraged were used for directed attacks or campaigns; some of the URLs were used in malspam campaigns to host malicious content, such as Dridex.
Dridex is mass-distribution malware that is typically sent through malspam.
Dridex has been known as an information-stealing malware or banking trojan that targets Windows platforms and is distributed via malicious spam attachments impersonating legitimate companies.
The threat actor behind Dridex generally uses billing- or invoice-themed emails, a tactic used by most mass-distribution malware.
The compromised or malicious URLs host the initial installer for Dridex to establish backdoor access.
The backdoor access established by Dridex is later used to distribute followup malware, including ransomware, if the initial infection is not discovered.
The domains associated with the compromised URLs leveraged by Dridex are usually legitimate but compromised websites.
For most Dridex campaigns, these URLs are used for a single day before the campaign moves on to a different URL.
Unit 42 researchers have observed two types of malspam pushing Dridex in the past few months: (1) a phishing email with an Excel spreadsheet attachment, and (2) a phishing email with a link to a message to download an Excel spreadsheet.
Unit 42 has published multiple articles over the past few years using the tag “Dridex.”
From the newly registered phishing URLs, Unit 42 observed that a couple of phishing URLs with travel-related keywords – “airlines” and “vacation” – were used by Dridex in 2021.
In January 2021, there was a malspam campaign that comprised emails that used Dropbox links to call animalairlines[.
]org/wp-content/plugins/wordpress-seo/inc/options/tk2xzwhphujenf.php and download the malware DLL to install Dridex.
The SHA256 values associated with some of the samples identified by Unit42 researchers are:
A list of Dropbox URLs associated with this wave of malspam are:
Once Dropbox was provided Palo Alto Networks threat intelligence, it immediately disabled sharing of those links and disabled the associated account to prevent further threat actor activity.
]com/app/plugins/cordova-plugin-statusbar/src/browser/HLn3obcR1vMJZNt.php was also contacted as part of the campaign.
In February and March 2021, there was a malspam campaign that comprised emails with Excel attachments to call soleravacation[.
]net/wp-content/plugins/mojo-marketplace-wp-plugin-is-broke/inc/cli/mxq6awnfhnmadd2.php and subsequently download the malware DLL to install Dridex.
The SHA256 values associated with some of the samples identified by Unit 42 researchers are:
Of note for this particular campaign, the malicious spreadsheets try to connect to five or more URLs to retrieve Dridex, in addition to soleravacation[.
Threat actors have targeted multiple organizations within the travel industry and have used Firebase to host phishing pages to either target employees working in the travel industry or customers.
Some of the organizations that have been targeted by Firebase-hosted web applications include an online marketplace for vacation rentals, upscale hotel chains, resort management companies and airline companies such as Tui.
As mentioned above, Firebase is backed by Google and supports developers of mobile or web applications, allowing them to store content in Google Cloud Storage.
Unit 42 observed attackers taking advantage of the inherent legitimacy of the Google Firebase domain to deceive targets and to bypass security filters that block domains and files that are known to be malicious.
Once Unit 42 notified Google, it immediately removed and blocked these phishing URLs to prevent further threat actor activity.
A sample of phishing URLs hosted on Firebase include:
Cybercriminals often want to monetize any “data” that they acquire through attacks, and data gathered about travelers or organizations operating in the travel sector is no different.
We have observed that threat actors monetize data by selling stolen account credentials, stolen customer data or stolen payment information.
During the pandemic, Unit 42 researchers noticed the supply for travel-themed services and products in underground markets drastically decreased (see Figure 5), possibly due to the global travel restrictions.
However, we expect that both supply and demand will increase as the world reopens for travel.
There are two main reasons criminals are attracted by data sets containing stolen usernames, emails and passwords.
First, they give criminals access to victims’ mileage or hotel points, which can easily be resold for profit.
Second, the credentials can easily be used for compromising and taking over victims’ accounts on other platforms, if the same credentials were used.
With all the potential financial gains from stolen login credentials, the strong demand in underground marketplaces encourages threat actors to actively acquire this data through social engineering, brute-forcing or exploiting vulnerable systems.
Organizations in the travel industry have access to a wealth of data, including personally identifiable information (PII), payment information and the contact information of customers.
In the recent SITA passenger service system attack, 4.5 million global data subjects were compromised.
While researchers attributed the attack to APT41, it was observed that financially motivated criminals also showed interest in this data.
There are three possible ways cybercriminals can abuse this type of data.
Cybercriminals have been offering a “shadow travel agency” service for years.
They reach out to individual travelers through various social media or instant messaging platforms such as Telegram, providing flight bookings, hotel reservations, car rentals, car rides and sightseeing tours with heavily discounted prices.
While travelers transfer clean money to the “shadow travel agency,” the “shadow travel agency” pays the actual service providers such as hotels or airlines with stolen payment information.
Due to the time gap in payment processing, service providers only realize they have been defrauded when they see the disputed card transactions or chargebacks weeks or months later.
There are three groups of victims in this scenario.
The first victim group is the payment information owners and stolen credit card holders.
The second victim group is the travelers who were unknowingly a part of the money laundering process, giving cybercriminals opportunities to cash out the stolen payment information they previously collected.
Travel industry organizations are considered the third victim group; they are the most impacted in this scheme.
Not only did they fail to profit from the products and services they provided, but they also had to cover the costs and chargeback penalties, as well as addressing the reputational impacts of the crime.
The travel industry and international travelers have been long-term targets for cybercriminals, suffering financial and reputational damage.
Threat actors not only sell fabricated information but also stolen information that they gather through phishing attacks.
During the pandemic, we noticed that travel-themed products and services offered by cybercriminals in underground marketplaces decreased significantly, possibly due to low demand.
However, as travel resumes, we expect travelers and the travel industry to be targeted again due to the high profitability associated with this data.
Therefore, it is important to be aware of phishing campaigns.
Best practices to protect yourself and your organization from phishing attacks include:
Palo Alto Networks customers are protected by:
Special thanks to Bradley Duncan, Lucas Hu, Zhanhao Chen and Bennett Woo for all the insightful data and experience sharing.
Sign up to receive the latest news, cyber threat intelligence and research from us
Please enter your email address!
Please mark, I'm not a robot!
By submitting this form, you agree to our Terms of Use and acknowledge our Privacy Statement.
© 2021 Palo Alto Networks, Inc. All rights reserved.
