Protect and empower your business by leveraging the platform, process and people skills to accelerate your zero trust initiatives
Protect and empower your business by leveraging the platform, process and people skills to accelerate your zero trust initiatives
Protect and empower your business by leveraging the platform, process and people skills to accelerate your zero trust initiatives
Zscaler: The Only Leader in the 2020 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Secure Web Gateways
Secure work from anywhere, protect data, and deliver the best experience possible for users
Ransomware is the biggest threat to digital business.
Learn how to take a proactive, zero trust approach to safeguarding your enterprise
Your network security is costing more than it’s worth.
See how five companies drove simplicity, savings and security
It’s time to protect your ServiceNow data better and respond to security incidents quicker
Dive into the latest security research and best practices
Dive into the latest security research and best practices
Dive into the latest security research and best practices
Join a recognized leader in Zero trust to help organization transform securely
Join a recognized leader in Zero trust to help organization transform securely
Join a recognized leader in Zero trust to help organization transform securely
Cybercriminals are known to look to current events to make their schemes and campaigns more engaging and relevant to unsuspecting victims.
These events don't need to be global in nature, and are often only of local or regional interest.
This helps the bad actors narrow their target hoping for a greater chance of success.
So when the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) terminates engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) contracts it had previously awarded, attentive cybercriminals have new fodder for another scheme.
Since July 2020, the Zscaler ThreatLabZ team has observed an increase in targeted attacks against multiple supply chain-related organizations in the oil and gas sector in the Middle East.
We discovered multiple instances of malicious PDF files sent as email attachments and were used to distribute an information-stealing Trojan, AZORult, to these organizations.
In this blog, we describe the details of this campaign, explaining the attack vectors, the malware distribution strategy, and the threat attribution.
The attack chain begins with an email that appears to be from an official working at the ADNOC and is targeted at officials working in the supply chain and government sectors in the Middle East.
Each email in this campaign has an attached PDF file.
This PDF contains download links on the first page that lead to legitimate file sharing sites, such as wetransfer and mega.nz where a ZIP archive is hosted.
The ZIP archive contains a malicious and packed .NET executable that will decrypt, load, and execute the embedded AZORult binary.
Figure 1 shows a graphical representation of the attack flow.
Figure 1: The flow of attack
Figure 2 shows an email message that pretends to come from a senior chemist of lab operations of ADNOC Sour Gas.
Figure 2: A fake email sent to officials in the supply chain industry in the Middle East.
In all the cases, the emails were sent from Gmail-based address.
The two Gmail addresses observed in the attacks were:
The threat actor also leveraged anonymous email services from Tutanota to create emails registered with keemail.me and tuta.io which were also used in this email campaign.
The PDF files attached to the email are multipage documents (containing 14 pages) that appear to be Requests for Quotations (RFQ) for supply contracts and legal tenders for various projects related to ADNOC and the Doha airport.
The decoy documents are carefully crafted to appear legitimate for social engineering purposes.
The first page of each document contains the instructions to access the specifications and drawings using embedded download links that lead to malicious ZIP archives as described in the attack flow above.
Some examples of the content in the PDFs include:
PDF Filename: PI-18031 Dalma Gas Development Project (Package B) -TENDER BULLETIN-01.pdf
Figure 3 shows a PDF that pretends to be a legitimate Request for Quotation (RFQ) related to the Dalma gas development project.
It bears the logo of ADNOC at the top right and the first page contains the malicious download links.
Figure 3: The fake letter contained in the PDF associated with this attack.
PDF Filename: AJC-QA HAMAD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT EXPANSION, DOHA.pdf
Figure 4 shows a PDF that pretends to be a Request for Quotation for Hamad International Airport expansion plan for Doha and supposedly comes from a supply chain trading contractor in Qatar.
Figure 4: The fake RFQ for a local airport expansion project.
The threat actor is specifically interested in Middle East targets, such as organisations in the supply chain and government sectors of the Middle East, especially the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Qatar.
Based on the target recipients of the email, the contents of the email, and the attached PDF files, along with the metadata and infrastructure analysis, we conclude that this is a targeted attack on organisations in the Middle East.
After investigating the metadata of PDF files, we were able to discover several PDFs that we associate with the same threat actor.
The distribution method has been used in the wild from January 2020 through May 2020 in low volume.
Starting from July 2020, we observed an increase in the activity of this threat actor, returning with a new campaign.
The metadata of the PDF files indicates that they were generated using Microsoft Office Word 2013.
The only unique author names used in all the PDF samples were:
Figure 5 shows an example of the metadata for the PDF file with the MD5 hash e368837a6cc3f6ec5dfae9a71203f2e2.
Figure 5: The metadata of one of the PDFs used in this campaign.
The complete list of all the PDF samples identified in this campaign is provided in the Appendix.
In addition to the contents of the emails and the documents that were used for threat attribution, we can also infer from the Command and Control (C&C) infrastructure that the threat actor has specifically chosen a C&C server that blends with the theme.
The C&C server in the samples we discovered was crevisoft.net.
At the time of analysis, this domain was resolving to the IP address 167.114.57.136.
We observed that this domain, when accessed directly, would redirect to a service consulting company from Egypt hosted at crevisoft.com as shown in Figure 6.
 Figure 6: A legitimate Middle East-based site hosted at crevisoft.com.
All of the following four domains would redirect to the above domain:
With a high confidence level, we can conclude that this threat actor is interested in stealing information and gaining access to infrastructure of supply chain-related organisations located in the Middle East.
For the purpose of technical analysis, we will consider the .NET binary with MD5 hash: 84e7b5a60cd771173b75a775e0399bc7
This payload, which is present inside the downloaded ZIP archive, is a packed and obfuscated .NET binary.
Based on static analysis, we can see that the payload pretends to be a Skype application with spoofed metadata as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Metadata of the main .NET executable.
Upon execution, it unpacks another payload that is embedded in the resource section.
Figure 8 shows the custom algorithm that decrypts the payload using a hardcoded key “GXR20”.
Figure 8: The subroutine used to decrypt the second stage .NET DLL.
Figure 9 shows the decrypted payload, which is a .NET DLL with the MD5 hash 0988195ab961071b4aa2d7a8c8e6372d and the name Aphrodite.dll
Figure 9: The unpacked and loaded second stage DLL called Aphrodite.
The code execution is transferred to the DLL by creating an object for class named “Mortiz.Anton” along with the following three parameters, as shown in Figure 10.
ugz1: “ddLPjs” (name of the bitmap image resource)
ugz3: ”KKBxPQsGk” (the decryption key)
projName: “Skype” (name of the project of main executable)
Figure 10: The code control passed to the Aphrodite DLL.
This DLL further unpacks another binary, which is embedded as a bitmap image in the resource section of the main executable, as shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11: The bitmap image inside the resource section that contains the next stage payload.
Similar to the second stage (Aphrodite), it is also encrypted with a custom algorithm.
The custom algorithm is based on XOR using the key indicated by the parameter ugz3.
The resulting unpacked binary is a .NET DLL with MD5 hash ae5f14478d5e06c1b2dc2685cbe992c1 and the name Jupiter.
The code control is transferred to the third stage DLL via a call to one of its routines as shown in Figure 12.
Figure 12: The unpacked and loaded third stage DLL called Jupiter.
This third stage DLL uses various methods to detect the presence of a virtualization or an analysis environment.
Below is a summary of the methods used by this DLL to detect the analysis environment.
Registry key: "HARDWARE\\DEVICEMAP\\Scsi\\Scsi Port 0\\Scsi Bus 0\\Target Id 0\\Logical Unit Id 0"
Data contains: "VBOX" OR "VMWARE" OR "QEMU"
Data contains: "VBOX" OR "QEMU"
Checks if key present: "SOFTWARE\\Oracle\\VirtualBox Guest Additions" OR "SOFTWARE\\VMware, Inc.\\VMware Tools"
Registry key: "HARDWARE\\DEVICEMAP\\Scsi\\Scsi Port 1\\Scsi Bus 0\\Target Id 0\\Logical Unit Id 0"
Registry key: "HARDWARE\\DEVICEMAP\\Scsi\\Scsi Port 2\\Scsi Bus 0\\Target Id 0\\Logical Unit Id 0"
Registry key: "SOFTWARE\\VMware, Inc.\\VMware Tools"
Data contains: "C:\\PROGRAM FILES\\VMWARE\\VMWARE TOOLS\\"
Checks if the export functions of kernel32.dll contains: wine_get_unix_file_name
Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) query-based checks:
WMI Query: "SELECT * FROM Win32_VideoController"
Checks for the presence of the following keywords in the description field:
Checks for the presence of a DLL with the name: "SbieDll.dll" in the process address space.
Checks if the system username contains either of the following strings:
FilePath contains: "//VIRUS" OR "SANDBOX" OR "SAMPLE" OR "C:\\file.exe"
After all the above environment checks are performed, the AZORult payload (MD5 hash: 38360115294c49538ab15b5ec3037a77) is injected using the process hollowing technique in a new instance of the main process.
We will not describe the details of the functionality of AZORult information stealer since it is already well-documented in the public domain.
It is important to note that based on the flow of the code execution and the anti-analysis techniques used, the .NET packed payload appears to be created using the CyaX packer.
More details about this packer can be found here.
The final unpacked payload, AZORult, will perform information stealing activities on the machine and exfiltrate the information by sending an HTTP POST request to the URL: hxxp://crevisoft.net/images/backgrounds/ob/index.php
Upon inspection, we discovered that opendir was enabled on the C&C server as shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Opendir enabled on the C&C server.
The AZORult panel on the C&C server can be accessed at the URL: hxxp://crevisoft.net/images/backgrounds/ob/panel/admin.php.
Figure 14: The AZORult panel
Among other artifacts we discovered on the C&C server, we found a PHP mailing script deployed at hxxp://crevisoft[.
This enables the threat actor to send emails using the C&C server’s SMTP.
Figure 15: The PHP mailing script on the C&C server.
Figure 16 shows the Zscaler Cloud Sandbox successfully detecting this .NET-based threat.
Figure 16: Zscaler Cloud Sandbox detection.
In addition to sandbox detections, Zscaler’s multilayered cloud security platform detects indicators at various levels, as seen here:
This threat actor is targeting employees in the supply chain industries in Oil and Gas sector in the middle east region.
As always, users should be cautious when receiving emails out of the blue, even if those emails appear to be related to something you are interested in, such as a legal tender for a project which might appear relevant.
And always be wary of links embedded inside file formats such as PDF since these links could lead to download of malicious files on your system.
The Zscaler ThreatLabZ team will continue to monitor this campaign, as well as others, to help keep our customers safe.
Uses PDF attachments containing malicious URLs
Extracts zip file and executes the binary.
Strings and other data are obfuscated in the payload.
Masquerading: Match Legitimate Name or Location
File names used related to projects directly linked to the Middle East.
Obfuscated Files or Information: Software Packing
Payloads are packed with a multilayer packer.
Uses Registry, WMI, UserName-based anti-VM techniques
Access Token Manipulation: Create Process with Token
Credentials from Password Stores: Credentials from Web Browsers
Indicator Removal on Host: File Deletion
Unsecured Credentials: Credentials In Files
Scheduled tasks are created using dropped XML files in %temp% directory with random names.
Files are dropped in the “AppData\Roaming” directory with the same name as a scheduled task.
ADNOC RFQ 97571784 - Purchase - core store Mussafah - Tehnical and Commercial.pdf
Dalma Gas Development Project (Package B) -TENDER BULLETIN-01.pdf
RFQ-VENDOR 3 YEARS SUPPLY CONTRACT (RENEWAL OF LTPA 62431092).pdf
RFQ-ALJ-HAMAD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT EXPANSION, DOHA.pdf
RFQ-HAMAD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT EXPANSION, DOHA QATAR.pdf
RFQ-HAMAD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT EXPANSION, DOHA.pdf
AJC-QA HAMAD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT EXPANSION, DOHA.pdf
Author of PDF: Mr. Adeel
