Discover our products and see what DomainTools can do for your organization.
DomainTools monitors network infrastructure creation to identify new threats and track campaigns.
As part of this work, DomainTools researchers identified two domains spoofing the World Health Organization (WHO) in late October and early November 2020:
Both domains redirected to legitimate WHO-resources when accessed: european-who to the European WHO website (euro.who.int), and health-world-org to the primary WHO website (who.int).
While their creation may be concerning, initial views indicate little of significance to either item.
Further analysis shows an interesting detail.
While the domains both redirect to legitimate resources for HTTP communication, the European domain features an MX record mapped to dedicated infrastructure completely unrelated to WHO, shown in the following DomainTools Iris screenshot:
The server, located in Lithuania and provided by Informacines Sistemos IR Technologijos UAB, was uniquely associated with the “european-who” domain in October and November 2020.
In this case, we observe a domain with no noticeable or significant HTTP functionality, but which does feature an MX record.
This would indicate the domain may be used for sending email even if it is not used for command and control (C2) or similar functionality.
To further refine this item, a search of phishing data and campaigns is required.
Working with several partner security companies, DomainTools identified suspicious emails, masquerading as a WHO report and survey email, sent in late October and early November 2020.
The emails contained an attachment, “WHO_Report_11-17.jnlp.” JNLP extensions refer to the Java Network Launching Protocol, used to identify a remote Java program (in Java Archive, or JAR, format) and an initial class to run when launched.
The observed JNLP object has the following content:
While referring to the legitimate WHO website, the JNLP payload retrieves a JAR, “WHO_Report.jar,” from the previously-observed domain, “health-world-org”, and executes the “WHO_Report” class within the JAR.
Although navigating to “health-world-org,” results in a redirect to the main WHO website, specifying the above resource downloads the JAR.
The JAR has the following characteristics:

Reviewing the JAR, it creates two objects, an executable and a decoy document:

The document is a legitimate, benign report on the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic authored by WHO which is used to distract the victim while in the background the executable launches.
The executable referenced above represents the primary payload for initial execution.
Reviewing the JAR file, the program retrieves it from a new location, “office-pulgin[.
]com,” and executes it through a call to another function, “frisco415,” shown below.
Interestingly, the US telephone area code for San Francisco, often referred to as “Frisco,” is 415.
The retrieved executable has the following characteristics:

Also of note, the “office-pulgin” domain is hosted on the same Autonomous System Number (ASN) as “european-who” (ASN 61272) at 88.119.170[.]2.
When launched, the malware performs a request to the IPify service (ipify.org) to determine the victim’s IP address:

The response is stored in a text file with an image extension at the following location:

The malware then attempts to enumerate processes on the running system, access directories typically associated with cached or saved credentials for web browsers, and access the system hosts file.
Once complete the malware attempts to communicate to another domain, “adverting-cdn[.
This IP address is in the same ASN as all other observed items.
Absent a successful connection with the resource above, observable malware functionality ceases.
DomainTools was unable to identify any further activity for the sample in question.
Based on observed behaviors, DomainTools assesses with medium confidence that the “adverting-cdn” domain serves as an exfiltration point for data harvested from the victim machine.
The overall sequence of events and malware functionality is summarized in the following diagram:
At first glance, the activity identified above appears focused on WHO-related entities and features significant efforts to masquerade as legitimate WHO services.
Such a level of detail and focus typically indicates narrow targeting and significant investment in lures and infrastructure to ensure campaign success.
This would imply specific targeting on WHO-related entities or other healthcare organizations, potentially for purposes such as state-directed espionage.
However, overall malware functionality as observed above is not especially interesting and appears to be a type of common information stealer.
While concerning, such malware is in widespread use and often features as part of criminal campaigns designed to harvest financial-related logons or enable ransomware incidents.
Furthermore, a review of functionality—such as dropping a text file named “kaosdma.png” and contacting “adverting-cdn”—identified over a dozen similar samples in several commercial malware repositories.
None of the additional malware samples identified through the query above show any obvious relationship to the WHO-focused activity or possess identifiers indicating similar levels of targeting specificity.
However, malware families referenced in identified detections include items such as AZORULT and Glupteba.
Although “commodity” in the sense that these are available in criminal markets for purchase, this very fact of accessibility to multiple parties means such malware could be employed by any entity willing to pay.
Several possibilities emerge if we engage in an abbreviated analysis of competing hypotheses based on observations from this campaign:
Other, final-stage campaign infrastructure—notably the “adverting-cdn” domain—is common across multiple incidents none of which appear related to the WHO or similar entities.
From these observations, three general hypotheses emerge:
Unfortunately, insufficient evidence exists from the current campaign, which emphasizes any of the three possibilities above.
DomainTools cannot, with currently available information, associate the activity described with any known, tracked entity at this time.
DomainTools will continue to monitor this activity and provide updates as they are available.
When a new domain is created, its functionality may not be readily apparent.
Even if a domain does not resolve to a webpage or resource, or simply forwards HTTP traffic to a legitimate site, it may still retain functionality using other services and protocols.
As observed in this activity, a suspicious domain yielded indicators of likely phishing activity even though the domain appeared inactive.
Further investigation with partner organizations yielded additional information that uncovered activity mimicking the WHO during a worldwide health crisis.
Although this campaign cannot be linked to any specific, known threat at this time, the activity in question is very interesting from the standpoint of technical analysis, and shows the merits of dogged research and analysis of suspicious network indicators.




Domain
Date Created
Registrar

Registrant Email

Name Server

IP Address
Hosting Provider
Hosting Location




adverting-cdn[.
]com
29 Oct 2020
PDR LTD. D/B/A PUBLICDOMAINREGISTRY.COM
contact@privacyprotect.org
bacloud.com
213.252.246[.
]23
BA Cloud
LT


european-who[.
]com
29 Oct 2020
PDR LTD. D/B/A PUBLICDOMAINREGISTRY.COM
contact@privacyprotect.org
bacloud.com
91.216.163[.
]179
Informacines Sistemos IR Technologijos UAB
LT


health-world-org[.
]com
13 Nov 2020
PDR LTD. D/B/A PUBLICDOMAINREGISTRY.COM
contact@privacyprotect.org
bacloud.com
89.41.26[.
]com
30 Sep 2020
PDR LTD. D/B/A PUBLICDOMAINREGISTRY.COM
contact@privacyprotect.org
bacloud.com
88.119.170[.
]2
Informacines Sistemos IR Technologijos UAB
NL


who-international[.
]com
20 Oct 2020
PDR LTD. D/B/A PUBLICDOMAINREGISTRY.COM
gdpr-masking@gdpr-masked.com
bacloud.com
89.41.26[.




File Name
SHA256
Description




office.exe
05d3a35cacf882e34b8433037ad7a9b292fcb2b08439823e4724add4ceacb665
Executable paylaod and information stealer.
WHO_Report.jar
98beba8a22b5f579b89cac0a1a35a254ae81488fb549481506f20983e720c5b1
First-stage payload leading to executable.

                                        
                                            Catch up on your industry reading with a curated list of the most popular blogs of Q3 2021.
This installment includes a ransomware defenders guide, valuable data set cheat sheet, original research, and helpful OSINT tools.

                                        
                                            Although ransomware holds a significant mindshare in security, phishing continues to be an effective and efficient tool for threat actors.
In this blog, Tim Helming walks through various anti-phishing tools and methods available to defenders.

                                        
                                            Although ransomware holds a significant mindshare in security, phishing continues to be an effective and efficient tool for threat actors.
In this blog, Tim Helming cautions not to dismiss BEC just because it’s not grabbing headlines.
Subscribe to DomainTools monthly newsletter to receive innovative, practical advice for improving their security posture.
Our goal is to help enable organizations to be more efficient, knowledgeable, and proactive in the day-to-day defense of their organization.
