For Government, Politics and Advocacy
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first public reporting of this PSS activity.
Facebook threat intelligence analysts and security experts work to find and stop a wide range of threats including cyber espionage campaigns, influence operations and hacking of our platform by nation-state actors and other groups.
As part of these efforts, our teams routinely disrupt adversary operations by disabling them, notifying people if they should take steps to protect their accounts, sharing our findings publicly and continuing to improve the security of our products.
Today we’re sharing our latest research into two clusters of unconnected cyber espionage activity.
One of them targeted primarily domestic audiences in Palestine.
The other cluster targeted audiences in the Palestinian territories and Syria and to a lesser extent Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon and Libya.
To disrupt both these operations, we took down their accounts, released malware hashes, blocked domains associated with their activity and alerted people who we believe were targeted by these groups to help them secure their accounts.
We shared information with our industry partners including the anti-virus community so they too can detect and stop this activity, strengthening our collective response against these groups across the internet.
We encourage people to remain vigilant and take steps to protect their accounts, avoid clicking on suspicious links and downloading software from untrusted sources that can compromise their devices and information stored on them.
The groups behind these operations are persistent adversaries, and we know they will evolve their tactics in response to our enforcement.
However, we keep improving our detection systems and collaborating with other teams in the security community to continue making it harder for these threat actors to remain undetected.
We’ll keep sharing our findings when possible so people are aware of the threats we’re seeing and can take steps to strengthen the security of their accounts.
This activity originated in the West Bank and focused on the Palestinian territories and Syria, and to a lesser extent Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon and Libya.
It relied on social engineering to trick people into clicking on malicious links and installing malware on their devices.
Our investigation found links to the Preventive Security Service — the Palestinian Authority’s internal intelligence organization.
This persistent threat actor focused on a wide range of targets, including journalists, people opposing the Fatah-led government, human rights activists and military groups including the Syrian opposition and Iraqi military.
They used their own low-sophistication malware disguised as secure chat applications, in addition to malware tools openly available on the internet.
Our investigation analyzed a number of notable tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs):
This activity originated in Palestine and targeted individuals in the same region, including government officials, members of the Fatah political party, student groups and security forces.
Our investigation linked this campaign to Arid Viper, a known advanced persistent threat actor.
It used sprawling infrastructure to support its operations, including over a hundred websites that either hosted iOS and Android malware, attempted to steal credentials through phishing or acted as command and control servers.
They appear to operate across multiple internet services, using a combination of social engineering, phishing websites and continually evolving Windows and Android malware in targeted cyber espionage campaigns.
We shared threat indicators with industry peers and security researchers as part of a concerted effort to disrupt this group’s operations.
We’re also sharing a detailed technical report with our findings, including threat indicators to help advance our industry’s understanding of this adversary (below).
Here are our key findings and some of the notable tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) we’ve observed:
Evolving Android and Windows Malware
See the full Threat Report on Arid Viper for more information and IOCs.
To help personalize content, tailor and measure ads, and provide a safer experience, we use cookies.
By clicking or navigating the site, you agree to allow our collection of information on and off Facebook through cookies.
Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies Policy
