Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
Since the middle of 2018, Proofpoint has been tracking campaigns abusing legitimate messaging services, offering fake jobs, and repeatedly following up via email to ultimately deliver the More_eggs backdoor.
These campaigns primarily targeted US companies in various industries including retail, entertainment, pharmacy, and others that commonly employ online payments, such as online shopping portals.
The actor sending these campaigns attempts to establish rapport with potential victims by abusing LinkedIn’s direct messaging service.
In direct follow-up emails, the actor pretends to be from a staffing company with an offer of employment.
In many cases, the actor supports the campaigns with fake websites that impersonate legitimate staffing companies.
These websites, however, host the malicious payloads.
In other cases, the actor uses a range of malicious attachments to distribute More_eggs.
We also believe that the same actor recently sent related campaigns, first noted by Brian Krebs, targeting anti-money laundering officers at financial institutions [1].
We have observed a number of variations among the campaigns, but most share common characteristics.
While not exhaustive, the general flow as well as specific examples of these attacks are described below.
Initially the actor uses a fraudulent, but legitimately created LinkedIn profile to initiate contact with individuals at the targeted company by sending invitations with a short message (Figure 1).
This appears as a benign email with the subject “Hi [Name], please add me to your professional network”.
Figure 1: Example of initial message in which attackers abuse LinkedIn messaging.
Within a week, the actor sends a direct email to the target’s work address reminding the recipient about the prior attempt to communicate on LinkedIn (Figure 2).
It uses the target’s professional title, as it appears on LinkedIn, as the subject, and often suggests the recipient click on a link to see the noted job description.
In other cases, this actor used an attached PDF with embedded URLs or other malicious attachments.
Figure 2: Example follow up email to the target’s work address, with a malicious URL.
The URLs link to a landing page that spoofs a real talent and staffing management company, using stolen branding to enhance the legitimacy of the campaigns (Figure 3).
The landing page initiates a download of a Microsoft Word file (Figure 4) with malicious macros created with Taurus Builder (described below).
If the recipient enables macros, the “More_eggs” payload will be downloaded and executed.
In other cases, the landing page may initiate the download of a JScript loader instead, but this intermediate malware still ultimately results in the delivery of More_eggs.
Figure 3: Example of a landing page for the URL included in email using stolen branding and a lookalike domain for a talent management agency.
This one specifically initiates a download of a malicious Microsoft Word document.
Figure 4: Example malicious Microsoft Word document that uses macros to download More_eggs.
As noted, some campaigns also used malicious attachments instead of URLs in the email.
Figure 5 shows an example of one such attachment, a PDF with a link to a spoofed landing page like that shown in Figure 3.
Figure 5: Example PDF attachment  that contains a malicious URL.
These campaigns demonstrated considerable variability, with the actor frequently changing delivery methods and more.
Examples of the types of techniques used by the actor to deliver the final More_eggs payload include:
Figure 6: Example of a benign email designed to establish rapport with potential victims
This actor uses a variety of tools to distribute malware.
We briefly describe three such tools below.
We use this name to describe a tool used to create malicious documents.
We believe Taurus builder was purchased on underground crime forums.
Notably, documents created with this builder use the CMSTP bypass as described in [2].
Both Palo Alto Networks [3] and QuoScient [4] have previously described documents created with this kit.
We use this name to describe documents generated by a builder purchased from the same seller as Taurus builder.
Depending on the variant it may exploit CVE-2017-0199, CVE-2017-8570, CVE-2017-8759, CVE-2017-11882, CVE-2018-0802, and/or CVE-2018-8174.
Notably, VenomKit often also uses the same CMSTP bypass as Taurus.
Documents from this kit have previously been discussed by Quoscient [4].
More_eggs is malware written in JScript used in these campaigns and others.
It is often used as a downloader.
In addition to its ability to download additional payloads, More_eggs has extensive capabilities to profile the infected machine.
The malware was first documented by Trend Micro [5].
Overlaps with Anti-Money Laundering Campaign
Brian Krebs wrote about a related campaign that targeted anti-money laundering officers at financial institutions that we believe may have been sent by the same actor.
Although targeting and the final payload were different in the campaign he described, key similarities to campaigns describe above included:
Note: As we were finalizing this report we observed a larger than usual campaign from this actor on Feb 21, 2019, from random senders, with a malicious URL in the email.
As threat actors continue to turn away from very large-scale “spray and pray” campaigns and focus on persistent infections with downloaders, RATs, bankers, and other malware, increasingly sophisticated social engineering and stealthy malware are making their way into a range of campaigns.
In response to the increasing effectiveness of layered defenses and end user education efforts, we can expect more threat actors to adopt approaches that improve the effectiveness of their lures and increase the likelihood of high-quality infections.
Note: We have informed all affected parties about the abuse of their services and brands in these campaigns.
Example Code Signed JS Loader
ET and ETPRO Suricata/Snort Signatures
2832245 | ETPRO CURRENT_EVENTS Possible More_eggs Connectivity Check
2834137 | ETPRO TROJAN Observed Malicious SSL Cert (More_eggs CnC)
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
