Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The operators behind the Maze Ransomware have claimed responsibility for the cyberattack affecting the City of Pensacola, Florida, but state that they are not affiliated with the recent shooting at NAS Pensacola.
In an email conversation with BleepingComputer, the operators of the Maze Ransomware stated that they were responsible for encrypting the city's data and have demanded a $1,000,000 ransom for a decryptor.
When Maze targets a network, they will steal the victim's files before they are encrypted.
The attackers then tell the victim that they will publicly release these files unless the ransom is paid.
Maze is not the first ransomware to make these claims, but as we have seen with the release of Allied Universal's documents, the Maze crew appears to be willing to follow up with their threats.
Maze has shared documents that were allegedly stolen from the city, but did not state if they have given a deadline to Pensacola or will release them.
One item that appeared to be of concern to the Maze operators was the timing of their attack.
Without our prompting, the Maze Ransomware operators expressed concerns about being linked to the recent NAS Pensacola shooting and told BleepingComputer that they had nothing to do with it.
"We also must tell you that there is no any connections with the shooting event that occurred before running maze.
We did not know about this.
Maze also wanted to reassure us that they purposely avoided emergency services, or what they call 'socially significant services', such as 911.
"Also we want to emphasize that no one of the socially significant services has suffered (for example 911)."
When we asked if they purposely avoided services like these, they told us that medical care centers or other 'socially vital objects' are not allowed and will decrypt any that are encrypted for free.
"We don’t attack hospitals, cancer centers, maternity hospitals and other socially vital objects, up to the point that if someone uses our software to block the latter, we will provide a decrypt for free."
When we attempted to confirm if the information provided by Maze is accurate, Kaycee Lagarde, Public Information Officer for the City of Pensacola, told BleepingComputer that due to ongoing investigations they could not provide additional details.
Lagarde did tell us that the city is slowly recovering and that their mail servers are back up and that most landlines have been restored.
Employees, though, continue to be unable to access their computers or the Internet until all of the issues are resolved.
We are currently in an assessment and recovery mode, and our IT Department is continuing to work diligently to make sure all computers are free of any viruses before we reconnect them to the network.
We don’t have an estimated time of completion, but they are working to restore services as quickly as possible.
As IT works to restore services, they are also looking into bringing experts in to assist with evaluating any potential impacts to data.
Our email servers are back up, but since IT still has our computers disconnected from the network, city employees only have limited access to email (via smartphone for employees who have city cell phones).
Most landlines have been restored.
The city remains operational, but we are somewhat limited since we aren’t able to use our computers or internet until these issues are resolved.
Emergency dispatch and 911 services were not impacted and continue to operate.
Our website at cityofpensacola.com and online permitting services at mygovernmentonline.org were not impacted and remain operational.
FBI: OnePercent Group Ransomware targeted US orgs since Nov 2020
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Me and my team will threat this team!
This is my first public comment about our threating!
If you think the same way, join our team!
What team is this and what do you plan to do?
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
