Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
A new version of the Ryuk Ransomware was released that will purposely avoid encrypting folders commonly seen in *NIX operating systems.
After the City of New Orleans was infected by ransomware, BleepingComputer confirmed that the city was infected by the Ryuk Ransomware using an executable named v2.exe.
After analyzing the v2.exe sample, security researcher Vitali Kremez shared with BleepingComputer an interesting change in the ransomware; it would no longer encrypt folders that are associated with *NIX operating systems.
The list of Ryuk blacklisted *NIX folders are:
At first glance, it seems strange that a Windows malware would blacklist *NIX folders when encrypting files.
Even stranger, Kremez told us that he has been asked numerous times whether there was a Unix variant of Ryuk as data stored in these operating systems have been encrypted in Ryuk attacks.
A Linux/Unix variant of Ryuk does not exist, but Windows 10 does contain a feature called the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) that allows you to install various Linux distributions directly in Windows.
These installations utilize folders with the same blacklisted names as listed above.
With the rising popularity of WSL, the Ryuk actors likely encrypted a Windows machine at some point that also affected the *NIX system folders used by WSL.
This would have caused these WSL installations to no longer work.
"They definitely have cases affecting WSL environments, which likely led them to blacklist NIX folders as they similarly do with the Windows ones.
It is new to me and might explain why Ryuk and how Ryuk affects NIX machines via WSL," Kremez told BleepingComputer.
As the goal of most successful ransomware is to encrypt a victim's data, but not affect the functionality of the operating system, this change makes sense
With these folders being blacklisted, Ryuk eliminates an additional headache that they would need to deal with for a paying customer whose WSL installations are ruined.
EasyWSL turns Linux docker images into a Windows 10 WSL distro
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
New malware uses Windows Subsystem for Linux for stealthy attacks
New Windows 10 21H2 build comes with improved WiFi security
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
