Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The actors behind the Maze Ransomware have released 2GB of files that were allegedly stolen from the City of Pensacola during their ransomware attack.
Earlier this month, the City of Pensacola was hit with a ransomware attack that impacted the city's email service, some phone service, and caused them to shut down their computer systems.
It was later confirmed by BleepingComputer that they were attacked by the Maze Ransomware who stated they stole data from the city before encrypting the network.
They then demanded a $1 million ransom to decrypt their files.
Yesterday, the Maze actors released 2GB of the 32GB of files that they state they stole from the city before encrypting the network.
In a discussion with BleepingComputer, the Maze actors stated that they released the stolen data to prove to the media that they steal more than just a few files during a ransomware attack.
"This the fault of mass media who writes that we don't exfiltrate data more than a few files.
We did not want to make a pressure on city, we still dont make it right now.
We've shown that our intentions are real."
When BleepingComputer asked if they intended to release the rest of the data, they responded with "It depends".
BleepingComputer has also contacted the City of Pensacola, but have not heard back as of yet.
Trucking giant Forward Air reports ransomware data breach
United Health Centers ransomware attack claimed by Vice Society
REvil ransomware is back in full attack mode and leaking data
The Week in Ransomware - September 10th 2021 - REvil returns
Ransomware gang's script shows exactly the files they're after
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
