Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The Maze ransomware operators have adopted a tactic previously used by the Ragnar Locker gang; to encrypt a computer from within a virtual machine.
In May, we previously reported that Ragnar Locker was seen encrypting files through VirtualBox Windows XP virtual machines to bypass security software on the host.
The virtual machine would mount a host's drives as remote shares and then run the ransomware in the virtual machine to encrypt the share's files.
As the virtual machine is not running any security software and is mounting the host's drives, the host's security software could not detect the malware and block it.
While performing an incident response for one of their customers, Sophos discovered Maze had attempted to deploy their ransomware twice but were blocked by Sophos' Intercept X feature.
For the first two attempts, the Maze attacker attempted to launch various ransomware executables using scheduled tasks named 'Windows Update Security,' or 'Windows Update Security Patches,' or 'Google Chrome Security Update.'
After the two failed attacks, Sophos' Peter Mackenzie told BleepingComputer that the Maze threat actors tried a tactic previously used by the Ragnar Locker ransomware.
In their third attack, Maze deployed an MSI file that installed the VirtualBox VM software on the server along with a customized Windows 7 virtual machine.
Once the virtual machine was started, like the previous Ragnar Locker attacks, a batch file called startup_vrun.bat batch file would be executed that preps the machine with the Maze executables.
The machine is then shut down, and once restarted again, will launch vrun.exe to encrypt the host's files.
As the virtual machine is performing the encryption on the host's mounted drives, security software could not detect the behavior and stop it.
The SophosLabs researchers note that this is an expensive attack method in terms of disk size compared to Ragnar Locker's previous attacks.
As Ragnar Locker's VM attack utilized Windows XP, the total footprint was only 404 MB in size.
As Maze used Windows 7, the footprint was much larger at a total of 2.6 GB.
This attack illustrates how ransomware operations monitor the tactics of their competitors and adopt them as necessary.
It should also be noted that Ragnar Locker is part of the 'Maze Cartel,' so it is possible that Ragnar offered help to Maze in this attack method.
Windows 11 is no longer compatible with Oracle VirtualBox VMs
The Week in Ransomware - September 10th 2021 - REvil returns
Ransomware gang threatens to leak data if victim contacts FBI, police
FBI: OnePercent Group Ransomware targeted US orgs since Nov 2020
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This wouldn't work if sharing was disabled in VM's settings right?
probably not, we should ask them to disable it when they launch the vm.
It's a customized VM installation.
Appreciate the reply -- my bad, didn't notice the payload was an entire VM :)
So the way to protect from VM attacks is to disable virtualization in BIOS right if you don't use VM?
Maybe anti-virus could be implemented to read contents inside VM disks.
7-zip can read them and extract just fine unless encrypted
Disable Windows (MSI) Installer via GPO (i.e., Enable 'Turn off Windows Installer').
Then only those with admin rights can install (and no one should be primarily working from an ID with admin rights).
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
