Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
 
​The Maze cybercrime gang is shutting down its operations after rising to become one of the most prominent players performing ransomware attacks.
The Maze ransomware began operating in May 2019 but became more active in November.
That's when the media-savvy operation revolutionized ransomware attacks by introducing a double-extortion tactic.
While ransomware operations have always enjoyed taunting news sites and researchers, for the most part, they tended to ignore journalists' emails.
This changed in November 2019, when Maze contacted BleepingComputer to let us know that they stole the unencrypted data for Allied Universal before encrypting them.
Maze stated that if Allied didn't pay a ransom, their data would be publicly released.
Ultimately, the ransom was not paid, and Maze released the stolen data.
Soon after, Maze launched a 'Maze News' site that they use to publish non-paying victims' data and issue "press releases" for journalists who follow their activities.
This double-extortion technique was quickly adopted by other large ransomware operations, including REvil, Clop, DoppelPaymer, who released their own data leak sites.
This double-extortion technique has now become a standard tactic used by almost all ransomware operations.
Maze continued to evolve ransomware operations by forming a ransomware cartel with Ragnar Locker and LockBit, to share information and tactics.
During their year and a half cybercrime spree, Maze has been responsible for attacks on notable victims, including Southwire, City of Pensacola, Canon, LG Electronics, Xerox, and many more.
Early last month, BleepingComputer began hearing rumors that Maze was getting ready to shut down their ransomware operation in a similar manner as GandCrab did in 2019.
The closing of operations was later confirmed after BleepingComputer was contacted by a threat actor involved in the Barnes and Noble ransomware attack.
This threat actor stated that they take part in ransomware attacks by compromising networks and stealing Windows domain credentials.
The compromised networks are then passed to affiliates who deploy the ransomware.
The group compromising networks, the affiliate, and ransomware developers then take equal shares of any ransom payments.
As part of our conversation, BleepingComputer was told that Maze was in the process of shutting down its operation, had stopped encrypting new victims in September 2020, and are trying to squeeze the last ransom payments from victims.
When BleepingComputer reached out to Maze to confirm if they were shutting down, we were told, "You should wait for the press release."
This week, Maze has started to remove victims that they had listed on their data leak site.
All that is left on the site are two victims and those who previously and had all of their data published.
The cleaning up of the data leak site indicates that the ransomware operation's shutdown is imminent.
It is not uncommon for ransomware operations to release the master decryption keys when they shut down their operation, as was done with Crysis, TeslaCrypt, and Shade.
BleepingComputer has reached out to Maze to ask if they will release their keys when they shut down their operation but have not heard back.
BleepingComputer has learned that many Maze affiliates have switched over to a new ransomware operation called Egregor.
Egregor began operating in the middle of September, just as Maze started shutting down their encryption operation.
It quickly became very active, as seen by the ID-Ransomware submission graph below.
Egregor is believed to be the same underlying software as both Maze and Sekhmet as they utilize the same ransom notes, similar payment site naming, and share much of the same code.
This was also confirmed by a ransomware threat actor who stated that Maze, Sekhmet, and Egregor were the same software.
Ransomware expert Michael Gillespie, who analyzed both Egregor and Sekhmet, also found that Egregor victims who paid a ransom were sent decryptors that were titled 'Sekhmet Decryptor.'
Unfortunately, this shows that even when a ransomware operation shuts down, it does not mean the threat actors involved retire as well.
They just move to the next ransomware operation.
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
JVCKenwood hit by Conti ransomware claiming theft of 1.5TB data
Second farming cooperative shut down by ransomware this week
Although they shut down, they didn't release free decrypter did they?
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
