Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Information technologies services giant Cognizant suffered a cyber attack Friday night allegedly by the operators of the Maze Ransomware, BleepingComputer has learned.
Cognizant is one of the largest IT managed services company in the world with close to 300,000 employees and over $15 billion in revenue.
As part of its operations, Cognizant remotely manages its clients through end-point clients, or agents, that are installed on customer's workstations to push out patches, software updates, and perform remote support services.
On Friday, Cognizant began emailing their clients, stating that they had been compromised and included a "preliminary list of indicators of compromise identified through our investigation."
Clients could then use this information to monitor their systems and further secure them.
The listed IOCs included IP addresses of servers and file hashes for the kepstl32.dll, memes.tmp, and maze.dll files.
These IP addresses and files are known to be used in previous attacks by the Maze ransomware actors.
There was also a hash for a new unnamed file, but there is no further information about it.
Security research Vitali Kremez has released a Yara rule that can be used to detect the Maze Ransomware DLL.
When we contacted the Maze operators about this attack, they deny being responsible.
In the past, Maze has been reticent to discuss attacks or victims until negotiations stall.
As this attack is very recent, Maze is likely not discussing it to avoid complications in what they hope would be potential ransom payment.
After reporting on this attack, Cognizant posted a statement to their web site that confirms the cyber attack was by Maze Ransomware:
Cognizant can confirm that a security incident involving our internal systems, and causing service disruptions for some of our clients, is the result of a Maze ransomware attack.
Our internal security teams, supplemented by leading cyber defense firms, are actively taking steps to contain this incident.
Cognizant has also engaged with the appropriate law enforcement authorities.
We are in ongoing communication with our clients and have provided them with Indicators of Compromise (IOCs) and other technical information of a defensive nature.
If the Maze operators conducted this attack, they were likely present in Cognizant's network for weeks, if not longer.
When enterprise-targeting ransomware operators breach a network, they will slowly and stealthily spread laterally throughout the system as they steal files and steal credentials.
Once the attackers gain administrator credentials on the network, they will then deploy the ransomware using tools like PowerShell Empire.
Before deploying ransomware, the Maze operators always steal unencrypted files before encrypting them.
These files are then used as further leverage to have the victim pay the ransom as Maze will threaten to release the data if a victim does not pay.
These are not idle threats as Maze has created a "News' site that is used to publish stolen data from non-paying victims.
If Maze was not behind the attack as they claim, there is still a good chance that data was stolen as that has become a standard tactic used by ransomware operators.
For this reason, all ransomware attacks must be treated as data breaches.
This is a developing story.
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
JVCKenwood hit by Conti ransomware claiming theft of 1.5TB data
Second farming cooperative shut down by ransomware this week
I don’t believe backups are sufficient anymore, definitely not when ransomware groups are stealing data before encrypting them.
Backups are definitely important and the only way a business could recover from such an attack but that doesn’t stop a data breach.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
