Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
French IT services giant Sopra Steria suffered a cyberattack on October 20th, 2020, that reportedly encrypted portions of their network with the Ryuk ransomware.
Sopra Steria is a European information technology company with 46,000 employees in 25 countries worldwide.
The company provides a wide range of IT services, including consulting, systems integration, and software development.
On October 21st, Sopra Steria issued a statement that they had suffered a cyberattack on the evening of October 20th, but provided few details about the attack.
"A cyberattack has been detected on Sopra Steria’s IT network on the evening of 20th October.
Security measures have been implemented in order to contain risks.
The Group’s teams are working hard for a return to normal as quickly as possible and every effort has been made to ensure business continuity.
Sopra Steria is in close contact with its customers and partners, as well as the competent authorities."
A source familiar with the attack has told BleepingComputer that the Sopra Steria network was encrypted by Ryuk ransomware, the same group that infected the Universal Health Services.
Numerous sources have also told the French IT website LeMagIT that it was Ryuk ransomware threat actors who were behind the attack.
If you have first-hand information about this or other unreported cyberattacks, you can confidentially contact us on Signal at +16469613731 or on Wire at @lawrenceabrams-bc.
This hacking group is known for its TrickBot and BazarLoader infections that allow threat actors to access a compromised network and deploy the Ryuk or Conti ransomware infections.
BazarLoader is increasingly being used in Ryuk attacks against high-value targets due to its stealthy nature and is less detected than TrickBot by security software.
When installed, BazarLoader will allow threat actors to remotely access the victim's computer and use it to compromise the rest of the network.
After gaining access to a Windows domain controller, the attackers then deploy the Ryuk ransomware on the network to encrypt all of its devices, as illustrated in the diagram above.
When we reached out to Sopra Steria for further confirmation, we were told that they "don’t have further details to share."
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
Installing latest security patches and antivirus updates are 2 most important it security practices.
It shameful that a giant it consulting company didn't do it.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
