In the Maze incident, the threat actors distributed the file-encrypting payload of the ransomware on the VM’s virtual hard drive (a VirtualBox virtual disk image (.vdi) file), which was delivered inside of a Windows .msi installer file more than 700MB in size.
The attackers also bundled a stripped down, 11 year old copy of the VirtualBox hypervisor inside the .msi file, which runs the VM as a “headless” device, with no user-facing interface.
The Maze-delivered virtual machine was running Windows 7, as opposed to the Windows XP VM distributed in the Ragnar Locker incident.
The threat actors initially demanded a $15 million ransom from the target of the attack.
The target did not pay the ransom.
The attackers then created scheduled tasks that would launch the ransomware with names based on variants of Windows Update Security or Windows Update Security Patches.
The initial attack did not produce the desired result; The attackers made a second attempt, with a ransomware payload named license.exe, launched from the same location.
But before they launched it, they executed a script that disabled Windows Defender’s Real-Time Monitoring feature.
The attackers then, once again, executed a command that would create a scheduled task on each computer they had copied the license.exe payload to, this time named Google Chrome Security Update, and set it up to run once at midnight (in the local time zone of the infected computers).
These detections indicate that the ransomware payloads were being caught and quarantined on machines protected by Sophos endpoint products before they could cause harm.
Sophos analysts started to see detections that indicated the malware was triggering the Cryptoguard behavioral protections of Intercept X.
In this case, Cryptoguard was preventing the malware from encrypting files by intercepting and neutralizing the Windows APIs that the ransomware was attempting to use to encrypt the hard drive.
So the attackers decided to try a more radical approach for their third attempt.
The Maze attackers delivered the attack components for the third attack in the form of an .msi installer file.
Inside of the .msi was an installer for both the 32-bit and 64-bit versions of VirtualBox 3.0.4.
This version dates back to 2009 and is still branded with its then-publisher’s name, Sun Microsystems.
The .msi also contains a 1.9GB (uncompressed) virtual disk named micro.vdi, which itself contains a bootable partition of Windows 7 SP1, and a file named micro.xml that contains configuration information for the virtual hard drive and session.
The root of that virtual disk contained three files associated with the Maze ransomware: preload.bat, vrun.exe, and a file just named payload (with no file extension), which is the actual Maze DLL payload.
The DLL file has a different, internal name for itself.
The preload.bat file (shown below) modifies the computer name of the virtual machine, generating a series of random numbers to use as the name, and joins the virtual machine to the network domain of the victim organization’s network using a WMI command-line function.
It also creates a folder in C:\SDRSMLINK\ and shares this folder with the rest of the network.
At some point (it’s unclear when and how, exactly, it accomplished this), the malware also writes out a file named startup_vrun.bat.
We found this file in c:\users\Administrator\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\Startup, which means it’s a persistence mechanism that relies on the computer rebooting before the attackers launch the malware.
The script copies the same three files found on the root of the VM disk (the vrun.exe and payload DLL binaries, and the preload.bat batch script) to other disks, then issues a command to shut down the computer immediately.
When someone powers the computer on again, the script executes vrun.exe.
The C:\SDRSMLINK\ folder location, created when the .msi file first runs, acts as a clearinghouse for specific folders the malware wants to track.
It’s full of symbolic links (symlinks, similar to Windows shortcuts) to folders on the local hard drive.
In Sophos’ earlier reporting about Ragnar Locker, we wrote that “Ragnar Locker ransomware was deployed inside an Oracle VirtualBox Windows XP virtual machine.
The attack payload was a 122 MB installer with a 282 MB virtual image inside—all to conceal a 49 kB ransomware executable.” MITRE has subsequently added this technique to its ATT&CK framework.
The Maze attackers took a slightly different approach, using a virtual Windows 7 machine instead of XP.
This significantly increased the size of the virtual disk, but also adds some new functionality that wasn’t available in the Ragnar Locker version.
The threat actors bundled a VirtualBox installer and the weaponized VM virtual drive inside a file named pikujuwusewa.msi.
The attackers then used a batch script called starter.bat.to launch the attack from within the VM.
The virtual machine (VM) that Sophos extracted from the Maze attack shows that this (newer) VM is configured in such a way that it allows easy insertion of another ransomware on the attacker’s ‘builder’ machine.
But the cost in terms of size is signficant: The Ragnar Locker virtual disk was only a quarter the size of the nearly 2GB virtual disk used in the Maze attack—all just to conceal one 494 KB ransomware executable from detection.
The attackers also executed the following commands on the host computer during the Maze attack:
This ran the Microsoft Installer that installs VirtualBox and the virtual hard drive.
They stop the Volume Shadow Copy service; the ransomware itself includes a command to delete existing shadow copies.
They halt SQL services to ensure that they can encrypt any databases.
They attempt to stop Sophos endpoint protection services (which fails).
Finally, they start the VirtualBox service and launch the VM.
The Maze threat actors have proven to be adept at adopting the techniques demonstrated to be successful by other ransomware gangs, including the use of extortion as a means to extract payment from victims.
As endpoint protection products improve their abilities to defend against ransomware, attackers are forced to expend greater effort to make an end-run around those protections.
Sophos endpoint products detect components of this attack as Troj/Ransom-GAV or Troj/Swrort-EG.
Indicators of compromise can be found on the SophosLabs Github.
SophosLabs Principal Researcher Andrew Brandt blends a 20-year journalism background with deep, retrospective analysis of malware infections, ransomware, and cyberattacks as the editor of SophosLabs Uncut.
His work with the Labs team helps Sophos protect its global customers, and alerts the world about notable criminal behavior and activity, whether it's normal or novel.
Follow him at @threatresearch on Twitter for up-to-the-minute news about all things malicious.
Operator of the world's first fully solar-powered malware research lab.
Peter leads the Incident Response Team at Sophos.
He works with an expert team of threat hunters to help organizations targeted by cyberthreats to investigate, contain and neutralize attacks.
Peter has been with Sophos since 2011 and specialises in ransomware attacks.
Your email address will not be published.
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
