At a time when remote work is becoming universal and the strain on SecOps, especially in healthcare and critical industries, has never been higher, ransomware actors are unrelenting, continuing their normal operations.
Multiple ransomware groups that have been accumulating access and maintaining persistence on target networks for several months activated dozens of ransomware deployments in the first two weeks of April 2020.
So far the attacks have affected aid organizations, medical billing companies, manufacturing, transport, government institutions, and educational software providers, showing that these ransomware groups give little regard to the critical services they impact, global crisis notwithstanding.
These attacks, however, are not limited to critical services, so organizations should be vigilant for signs of compromise.
The ransomware deployments in this two-week period appear to cause a slight uptick in the volume of ransomware attacks.
However, Microsoft security intelligence as well as forensic data from relevant incident response engagements by Microsoft Detection and Response Team (DART) showed that many of the compromises that enabled these attacks occurred earlier.
Using an attack pattern typical of human-operated ransomware campaigns, attackers have compromised target networks for several months beginning earlier this year and have been waiting to monetize their attacks by deploying ransomware when they would see the most financial gain.
Many of these attacks started with the exploitation of vulnerable internet-facing network devices; others used brute force to compromise RDP servers.
The attacks delivered a wide range of payloads, but they all used the same techniques observed in human-operated ransomware campaigns: credential theft and lateral movement, culminating in the deployment of a ransomware payload of the attacker’s choice.
Because the ransomware infections are at the tail end of protracted attacks, defenders should focus on hunting for signs of adversaries performing credential theft and lateral movement activities to prevent the deployment of ransomware.
In this blog, we share our in-depth analysis of these ransomware campaigns.
We have included additional technical details including hunting guidance and recommended prioritization for security operations (SecOps).
While the recent attacks deployed various ransomware strains, many of the campaigns shared infrastructure with previous ransomware campaigns and used the same techniques commonly observed in human-operated ransomware attacks.
They then remained relatively dormant within environments until they identified an opportune time to deploy ransomware.
To gain access to target networks, the recent ransomware campaigns exploited internet-facing systems with the following weaknesses:
Applying security patches for internet-facing systems is critical in preventing these attacks.
Like many breaches, attackers employed credential theft, lateral movement capabilities using common tools, including Mimikatz and Cobalt Strike, network reconnaissance, and data exfiltration.
In these specific campaigns, the operators gained access to highly privileged administrator credentials and were ready to take potentially more destructive action if disturbed.
On networks where attackers deployed ransomware, they deliberately maintained their presence on some endpoints, intending to reinitiate malicious activity after ransom is paid or systems are rebuilt.
In addition, while only a few of these groups gained notoriety for selling data, almost all of them were observed viewing and exfiltrating data during these attacks, even if they have not advertised or sold yet.
As with all human-operated ransomware campaigns, these recent attacks spread throughout an environment affecting email identities, endpoints, inboxes, applications, and more.
Because it can be challenging even for experts to ensure complete removal of attackers from a fully compromised network, it’s critical that vulnerable internet-facing systems are proactively patched and mitigations put in place to reduce the risk from these kinds of attacks.
While individual campaigns and ransomware families exhibited distinct attributes as described in the sections below, these human-operated ransomware campaigns tended to be variations on a common attack pattern.
They unfolded in similar ways and employed generally the same attack techniques.
Ultimately, the specific ransomware payload at the end of each attack chain was almost solely a stylistic choice made by the attackers.
RobbinHood ransomware operators gained some attention for exploiting vulnerable drivers late in their attack chain to turn off security software.
However, like many other human-operated ransomware campaigns, they typically start with an RDP brute-force attack against an exposed asset.
They eventually obtain privileged credentials, mostly local administrator accounts with shared or common passwords, and service accounts with domain admin privileges.
RobbinHood operators, like Ryuk and other well-publicized ransomware groups, leave behind new local and Active Directory user accounts, so they can regain access after their malware and tools have been removed.
Attackers often shift infrastructure, techniques, and tools to avoid notoriety that might attract law enforcement or security researchers.
They often retain them while waiting for security organizations to start considering associated artifacts inactive, so they face less scrutiny.
Vatet, a custom loader for the Cobalt Strike framework that has been seen in ransomware campaigns as early as November 2018, is one of the tools that has resurfaced in the recent campaigns.
The group behind this tool appears to be particularly intent on targeting hospitals, as well as aid organizations, insulin providers, medical device manufacturers, and other critical verticals.
They are one of the most prolific ransomware operators during this time and have caused dozens of cases.
Using Vatet and Cobalt Strike, the group has delivered various ransomware payloads.
More recently, they have been deploying in-memory ransomware that utilizes Alternate Data Streams (ADS) and displays simplistic ransom notes copied from older ransomware families.
To access target networks, they exploit CVE-2019-19781, brute force RDP endpoints, and send email containing .lnk files that launch malicious PowerShell commands.
Once inside a network, they steal credentials, including those stored in the Credential Manager vault, and move laterally until they gain domain admin privileges.
The group has been observed exfiltrating data prior to deploying ransomware.
NetWalker campaign operators gained notoriety for targeting hospitals and healthcare providers with emails claiming to provide information about COVID-19.
These emails also delivered NetWalker ransomware directly as a .vbs attachment, a technique that has gained media attention.
However, the campaign operators also compromised networks using misconfigured IIS-based applications to launch Mimikatz and steal credentials, which they then used to launch PsExec, and eventually deploying the same NetWalker ransomware.
This Java-based ransomware had been considered a novelty, but the campaigns deploying PonyFinal weren’t unusual.
Campaign operators compromised internet-facing web systems and obtained privileged credentials.
To establish persistence, they used PowerShell commands to launch the system tool mshta.exe and set up a reverse shell based on a common PowerShell attack framework.
They also used legitimate tools, such as Splashtop, to maintain remote desktop connections.
One of the first ransomware campaigns to make headlines for selling stolen data, Maze continues to target technology providers and public services.
Maze has a history of going after managed service providers (MSPs) to gain access to the data and networks of MSP customers.
Maze has been delivered via email, but campaign operators have also deployed Maze to networks after gaining access using common vectors, such as RDP brute force.
Once inside a network, they perform credential theft, move laterally to access resources and exfiltrate data, and then deploy ransomware.
In a recent campaign, Microsoft security researchers tracked Maze operators establishing access through an internet-facing system by performing RDP brute force against the local administrator account.
Using the brute-forced password, campaign operators were able to move laterally because built-in administrator accounts on other endpoints used the same passwords.
After gaining control over a domain admin account through credential theft, campaign operators used Cobalt Strike, PsExec, and a plethora of other tools to deploy various payloads and access data.
They established fileless persistence using scheduled tasks and services that launched PowerShell-based remote shells.
They also turned on Windows Remote Management for persistent control using stolen domain admin privileges.
To weaken security controls in preparation for ransomware deployment, they manipulated various settings through Group Policy.
Possibly the first ransomware group to take advantage of the network device vulnerabilities in Pulse VPN to steal credentials to access networks, REvil (also called Sodinokibi) gained notoriety for accessing MSPs and accessing the networks and documents of customers – and selling access to both.
They kept up this activity during the COVID-19 crisis, targeting MSPs and other targets like local governments.
REvil attacks are differentiated in their uptake of new vulnerabilities, but their techniques overlap with many other groups, relying on credential theft tools like Mimikatz once in the network and performing lateral movement and reconnaissance with tools like PsExec.
Other ransomware families used in human-operated campaigns during this period include:
We highly recommend that organizations immediately check if they have any alerts related to these ransomware attacks and prioritize investigation and remediation.
Malicious behaviors relevant to these attacks that defenders should pay attention to include:
Customers using Microsoft Defender Advanced Threat Protection (ATP) can consult a companion threat analytics report for more details on relevant alerts, as well as advanced hunting queries.
Customers subscribed to the Microsoft Threat Experts service can also refer to the targeted attack notification, which has detailed timelines of attacks, recommended mitigation steps for disrupting attacks, and remediation advice.
If your network is affected, perform the following scoping and investigation activities immediately to understand the impact of this breach.
Detections and mitigations should concentrate on holistic behavioral based hunting where possible, and hardening infrastructure weaknesses favored by these attackers as soon as possible.
Investigate endpoints affected by these attacks and identify all the credentials present on those endpoints.
Assume that these credentials were available to attackers and that all associated accounts are compromised.
Note that attackers can not only dump credentials for accounts that have logged on to interactive or RDP sessions, but can also dump cached credentials and passwords for service accounts and scheduled tasks that are stored in the LSA Secrets section of the registry.
Isolate endpoints that have command-and-control beacons or have been lateral movement targets.
Locate these endpoints using advanced hunting queries or other methods of directly searching for related IOCs.
Isolate machines using Microsoft Defender ATP, or use other data sources, such as NetFlow, and search through your SIEM or other centralized event management solutions.
Look for lateral movement from known affected endpoints.
Identify perimeter systems that attackers might have utilized to access your network.
You can use a public scanning interface, such as shodan.io, to augment your own data.
Systems that should be considered of interest to attackers include:
To further reduce organizational exposure, Microsoft Defender ATP customers can use the Threat and Vulnerability Management (TVM) capability to discover, prioritize, and remediate vulnerabilities and misconfigurations.
TVM allows security administrators and IT administrators to collaborate seamlessly to remediate issues.
Many ransomware operators enter target networks through existing infections of malware like Emotet and Trickbot.
These malware families, traditionally considered to be banking trojans, have been used to deliver all kinds of payloads, including persistent implants.
Investigate and remediate any known infections and consider them possible vectors for sophisticated human adversaries.
Ensure that you check for exposed credentials, additional payloads, and lateral movement prior to rebuilding affected endpoints or resetting passwords.
As ransomware operators continue to compromise new targets, defenders should proactively assess risk using all available tools.
You should continue to enforce proven preventive solutions—credential hygiene, minimal privileges, and host firewalls—to stymie these attacks, which have been consistently observed taking advantage of security hygiene issues and over-privileged credentials.
Apply these measures to make your network more resilient against new breaches, reactivation of dormant implants, or lateral movement:
For additional guidance on improving defenses against human-operated ransomware and building better security posture against cyberattacks in general, read Human-operated ransomware attacks: A preventable disaster.
What we’ve learned from the increase in ransomware deployments in April is that attackers pay no attention to the real-world consequences of disruption in services—in this time of global crisis—that their attacks cause.
Human-operated ransomware attacks represent a different level of threat because adversaries are adept at systems administration and security misconfigurations and can therefore adapt to any path of least resistance they find in a compromised network.
If they run into a wall, they try to break through.
And if they can’t break through a wall, they’ve shown that they can skillfully find other ways to move forward with their attack.
As a result, human-operated ransomware attacks are complex and wide-reaching.
No two attacks are exactly the same.
Microsoft Threat Protections (MTP) provides coordinated defenses that uncover the complete attack chain and help block sophisticated attacks like human-operated ransomware.
MTP combines the capabilities of multiple Microsoft 365 security services to orchestrate protection, prevention, detection, and response across endpoints, email, identities, and apps.
Through built-in intelligence, automation, and integration, MTP can block attacks, eliminate their persistence, and auto-heal affected assets.
It correlates signals and consolidates alerts to help defenders prioritize incidents for investigation and response.
MTP also provides a unique cross-domain hunting capability that can further help defenders identify attack sprawl and get org-specific insights for hardening defenses.
Microsoft Threat Protection is also part of a chip-to-cloud security approach that combines threat defense on the silicon, operating system, and cloud.
Hardware-backed security features on Windows 10 like address space layout randomization (ASLR), Control Flow Guard (CFG), and others harden the platform against many advanced threats, including ones that take advantage of vulnerable kernel drivers.
These platform security features seamlessly integrate with Microsoft Defender ATP, providing end-to-end security that starts from a strong hardware root of trust.
On Secured-core PCs these mitigations are enabled by default.
We continue to work with our customers, partners, and the research community to track human-operated ransomware and other sophisticated attacks.
For dire cases customers can use available services like the Microsoft Detection and Response (DART) team to help investigate and remediate.
Microsoft Threat Protection Intelligence Team
Human-operated ransomware campaigns employ a broad range of techniques made possible by attacker control over privileged domain accounts.
The techniques listed here are techniques commonly used during attacks against healthcare and critical services in April 2020.
Microsoft is a leader in cybersecurity, and we embrace our responsibility to make the world a safer place.
