The malicious code has now been removed from all stores, but users are advised to review card statements for suspicious transactions.


                        Everything you need to know about viruses, trojans and malicious software
Cyber attacks and malware are one of the biggest threats on the internet.
Learn about the different types of malware - and how to avoid falling victim to attacks.
Hacker groups that engage in web skimming (also known as Magecart) attacks have breached the web stores of two of the world's biggest retail chains -- accessories store Claire's and sporting goods retailer Intersport.
According to reports published today by security firms Sanguine Security and ESET, hackers breached the two companies' websites and hid malicious code that would record payment card details entered in checkout forms.
According to Sanguine Security's Willem de Groot, the Claire's website was compromised between April 25 and June 13, and so was sister-site Icing.
De Groot said he contacted Claire's management at the time of the attack, and the company removed the malicious code from their site.
Claire and Icing users who shopped online during the above-listed interval are advised to keep an eye out on their card statements for unauthorized transactions and lock their cards and work with their banks if they spot anything suspicious.
"We are working diligently to determine the transactions that were involved so that we can notify those individuals," a Claire's spokesperson told ZDNet today.
"Cards used in our retail stores were not affected by this issue.
We have also notified the payment card networks and law enforcement.
The payment card network rules generally provide that cardholders are not responsible for unauthorized charges that are timely reported.
We regret that this occurred and apologize to our customers for any inconvenience caused."
A similar incident was also detailed today by antivirus maker ESET, impacting the website of Intersport, one of Europe's largest sporting goods retail chains, with more than 5,800 stores across the continent.
The skimmer wasn't loaded on all versions of the Intersport website, but only on the local versions serving customers in Croatia, Serbia, Slovenia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Another greedy #Magecart campaign found be #ESETresearch - this time in Balkans.
Crooks were trying to skim credit cards of #Intersport e-shoppers in #Croatia, #Serbia, #Slovenia, #Montenegro, #BosniaandHerzegovina.
🇭🇷 🇷🇸 🇸🇮 🇲🇪 🇧🇦 @OndrashMachula 1/2 pic.twitter.com/m7leaNcgQN
According to de Groot, who also looked into the Intersport incident, the company's stores got hacked on April 30, cleaned on May 3, and then hacked again on May 14.
ESET said the company removed the malicious code within hours after being notified of the latest hack.
Customers who made purchases on the impacted Intersport websites should contact their card company and monitor statements for fraudulent purchases.
However, In a statement provided to ZDNet and also published on the company's website, Intersport admitted to the incident but said that "no payment card information were intercepted."
Both the Claire's and Intersport incidents took place during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic when most physical stores had been closed, and the companies redirected users toward their online sites for product purchases.
Article updated on June 15, 11:50 am ET with statement from Claire's, and again on June 18, 05:40am with statement from Intersport.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
