An official website of the United States government Here's how you know
Immediate Actions You Can Take Now to Protect Against Conti Ransomware
• Use multi-factor authentication.
• Segment and segregate networks and functions.
• Update your operating system and software.
Note: This Alert uses the MITRE Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge (ATT&CK®) framework, version 9.
See the ATT&CK for Enterprise for all referenced threat actor tactics and techniques.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) have observed the increased use of Conti ransomware in more than 400 attacks on U.S. and international organizations.
(See FBI Flash: Conti Ransomware Attacks Impact Healthcare and First Responder Networks.)
In typical Conti ransomware attacks, malicious cyber actors steal files, encrypt servers and workstations, and demand a ransom payment.
Click here for a PDF version of this report.
Click here for indicators of compromise (IOCs) in STIX format.
While Conti is considered a ransomware-as-a-service (RaaS) model ransomware variant, there is variation in its structure that differentiates it from a typical affiliate model.
It is likely that Conti developers pay the deployers of the ransomware a wage rather than a percentage of the proceeds used by affiliate cyber actors and receives a share of the proceeds from a successful attack.
Conti actors often gain initial access [TA0001] to networks through:
In the execution phase [TA0002], actors run a getuid payload before using a more aggressive payload to reduce the risk of triggering antivirus engines.
CISA and FBI have observed Conti actors using Router Scan, a penetration testing tool, to maliciously scan for and brute force [T1110] routers, cameras, and network-attached storage devices with web interfaces.
Additionally, actors use Kerberos attacks [T1558.003] to attempt to get the Admin hash to conduct brute force attacks.
Conti actors are known to exploit legitimate remote monitoring and management software and remote desktop software as backdoors to maintain persistence [TA0003] on victim networks.
In some cases, the actors also use TrickBot malware to carry out post-exploitation tasks.
According to a recently leaked threat actor “playbook,” [6] Conti actors also exploit vulnerabilities in unpatched assets, such as the following, to escalate privileges [TA0004] and move laterally [TA0008] across a victim’s network:
Artifacts leaked with the playbook identify four Cobalt Strike server Internet Protocol (IP) addresses Conti actors previously used to communicate with their command and control (C2) server.
CISA and FBI have observed Conti actors using different Cobalt Strike server IP addresses unique to different victims.
Conti actors often use the open-source Rclone command line program for data exfiltration [TA0010].
After the actors steal and encrypt the victim's sensitive data [T1486], they employ a double extortion technique in which they demand the victim pay a ransom for the release of the encrypted data and threaten the victim with public release of the data if the ransom is not paid.
Conti ransomware uses the ATT&CK techniques listed in table 1.
CISA, FBI, and NSA recommend that network defenders apply the following mitigations to reduce the risk of compromise by Conti ransomware attacks.
Review CISA’s APTs Targeting IT Service Provider Customers guidance for additional mitigations specific to IT Service Providers and their customers.
If a ransomware incident occurs at your organization, CISA, FBI, and NSA recommend the following actions:
CISA, FBI, and NSA strongly discourage paying a ransom to criminal actors.
Paying a ransom may embolden adversaries to target additional organizations, encourage other criminal actors to engage in the distribution of ransomware, and/or may fund illicit activities.
Paying the ransom also does not guarantee that a victim’s files will be recovered.
CISA offers a range of no-cost cyber hygiene services to help organizations assess, identify, and reduce their exposure to threats, including ransomware.
By requesting these services, organizations of any size could find ways to reduce their risk and mitigate attack vectors.
The StopRansomware.gov webpage is an interagency resource that provides guidance on ransomware protection, detection, and response.
This includes ransomware alerts, reports, and resources from CISA and other federal partners, including:
The U.S. Department of State’s Rewards for Justice (RFJ) program offers a reward of up to $10 million for reports of foreign government malicious activity against U.S. critical infrastructure.
See the RFJ website for more information and how to report information securely.
To report suspicious or criminal activity related to information found in this Joint Cybersecurity Advisory, contact your local FBI field office at www.fbi.gov/contact-us/field-offices, or the FBI’s 24/7 Cyber Watch (CyWatch) at (855) 292-3937 or by e-mail at CyWatch@fbi.gov.
When available, please include the following information regarding the incident: date, time, and location of the incident; type of activity; number of people affected; type of equipment used for the activity; the name of the submitting company or organization; and a designated point of contact.
If you have any further questions related to this Joint Cybersecurity Advisory, or to request incident response resources or technical assistance related to these threats, contact CISA at CISAServiceDesk@cisa.dhs.gov.
For NSA client requirements or general cybersecurity inquiries, contact the NSA Cybersecurity Requirements Center at 410-854-4200 or Cybersecurity_Requests@nsa.gov.
This product is provided subject to this Notification and this Privacy & Use policy.
We recently updated our anonymous product survey; we'd welcome your feedback.
Receive security alerts, tips, and other updates.
CISA is part of the Department of Homeland Security
