Analyst1 spent time digging through criminal marketplaces where Cartel gangs have a presence to research and analyze the criminal entities within the alleged Cartel.
We explored the malware and tools the groups use, tracked their bitcoin transactions, and studied relevant reports from other researchers in the field alongside select media outlets.
Our research identified several key findings which are further detailed in our white paper “Ransom Mafia: Analysis of the World’s First Ransom Cartel” such as:
Four ransomware gangs currently exist within the Cartel: Twisted Spider2, Viking Spider3, Wizard Spider3, and the Lockbit4 Gang as seen in Figure 1 below.
Note: The SunCrypt gang is no longer active, but they previously claimed allegiance to the Cartel and have since retired.
The gangs who make up the Cartel originate from eastern Europe and primarily speak Russian, based on posts made to underground criminal forums.
Interestingly, all of the gangs build checks and balances into their ransomware to ensure that the payload does not execute on Russian victims.
Here, the malware checks if the system language matches a dialect spoken in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), which formerly made up the Soviet Union.
Advanced attackers will often even purposely place false flags into their operations to lead investigators astray.
However, the Cartel gangs do little to hide the fact they speak Russian, and they go out of their way not to target victims within affiliated Russian territories.
During our research into Twisted Spider operations, Analyst1 identified the following key findings associated with the Twisted Spider gang:
Viking Spider first began ransom operations in December 2019.
The gang uses ransomware known as Ragnar Locker to compromise and extort organizations.
Below are key findings identified while researching Viking Spider activity.
Wizard Spider is the most experienced attacker within the Cartel.
The gang began ransom operations in August 2018, and they are connected to other criminal operations dating back to as early as 2016.
Analyst1 identified these key findings during our research into Wizard Spider:
The Lockbit Gang first came onto the enterprise ransomware scene in September 2020.
Much like the other gangs discussed so far, Lockbit brings its own unique tactics to the ransomware game.
Analyst1 found the following findings while researching the Lockbit Gang:
The SunCrypt gang began conducting ransomware attacks in October 2019.
Analyst1 researched the attacks and progression of SunCrypt operations up to present day and found the following key findings:
In November 2020, Twisted Spider – the gang who began the Cartel – announced they were shutting down their operations.
In a further twist, they also claimed the Cartel never existed!
In their last press release, Twisted Spider stated the Cartel was only real in journalists' minds17.
Based on the events detailed in our white paper and the specific ties between gangs within the Cartel (outlined next), Twisted Spider's claims are untrue.
The initial claim the gang was retiring was misleading.
The tactics used in the attacks overlap in infrastructure, and the technical similarities between Egregor and Maze ransomware made for strong attribution.
Clearly, Twisted Spider was behind both operations.
The second claim stating the Cartel never existed was not as clear-cut.
Twisted Spider, Viking Spider, Wizard Spider, the Lockbit gang, and the SunCrypt gang claimed they were a ransomware Cartel.
Why would all of these criminal gangs speak out publicly, stating they had joined together?
To further assess, Analyst1 looked to the evidence to make our own assessment.
The first tie we found provided evidence that the groups are working together and sharing resources to extort victims.
Several gangs compromised and stole victim data, which they passed on to Twisted Spider.
Twisted Spider then posted the victim's data and attempted to negotiate a ransom on their data leak site.
This type of collaboration and sharing would not occur unless all three criminal elements had a trusted relationship with one another.
Figure 2 below is a visualization detailing several ties, which we discuss next.
Figure 2:Cartel Ties A & B
In May 2020, Viking Spider compromised MJ Brunner of brunnerworks.com.
After the compromise, Viking Spider posted Brunner's data to their leak site, ragnerleaks[.]top.
A few weeks later in June 2020, Twisted Spider posted Brunner data on Viking Spider’s behalf along with threatening messages to their data leak site, mazenews[.]top.
Not long after, a similar situation took place.
This time, the Lockbit Gang breached and attempted to extort a target: the Smith Group.
At the time however, the Lockbit Gang did not have a data leak site.
In a continued effort to share Cartel resources, Twisted Spider posted the stolen data to their site, mazenews[.
]top, on behalf of the Lockbit gang.
Furthermore, Twisted Spider referenced both the Cartel and each member gang who originally stole the data on both occasions.
Figure 3 shows the posts below:
Figure 3: Twisted Spiders data leak site, Mazenews[.
]top displaying data stolen by Viking spider (Ragnar) and Lockbit gang.2, 3
We mentioned previously that the SunCrypt Gang told Bleeping Computer in August 2020 that they joined the Cartel, which Twisted Spider disputed.
Yet, beginning in October 2020 in their early operations, Twisted Spider used two IP addresses, 91.218.114[.
]30, 31 for command-and-control infrastructure.29, 30 Ten months later, the SunCrypt Gang used the same IP addresses for command-and-control to deliver ransomware in their attacks.
Granted, the tie would be stronger if the IP used in ransom operations took place during the same time frame.
However, Twisted Spider used the 91.218.114.3X range for attacks over at least six months.
The extended use and address range indicates that this was persistent infrastructure that Twisted Spider frequently used and controlled themselves.
It is unlikely that the SunCrypt Gang would have access to the infrastructure if they did not have a trusted relationship with Twisted Spider.
Table 1 below details the evidence supporting Tie B.
Several other circumstantial and technical ties exist as well.
These are weaker ties, and you should not use them for attribution on their own.
Collectively, however, they are worth discussing:
Analyst1 assesses that the Cartel is not an authentic entity, but instead a collective of criminal gangs who, at times, work together in ransom operations.
There needs to be more than cooperation, resource, and tactic sharing between gangs for their partnership to qualify as a true Cartel, though.
Profit-sharing is the primary element missing in the coalition of ransomware attackers discussed.
Cartels are dangerous due to the large financial resources that profit-sharing provides.
Analyst1 researched all known bitcoin wallets and their associated transactions associated with the gangs discussed.
We followed the money trail and observed examples of victims paying a gang and gangs paying their affiliates, but we did not find any evidence that the gangs share profits with other gangs in the Cartel.
We believe the gangs created the Cartel facade to appear larger, stronger more powerful to further intimidate victims into paying ransom demands.
The illusion and public claims made about the Cartel achieved the desired effect; however, it also brought global attention from law enforcement and government entities.
We believe this prompted Twisted Spider to lie about retiring, and this explains why they attempted to retract their Cartel affiliation.
For the same reasons, Twisted Spider stopped communicating publicly, and they no longer use social media or press releases to voice their demands.
Moving forward, Analyst1 believes these ransomware gangs will continue to work with one another.
The working relationship, however, will likely continue to be done behind the scenes and not on a public level.
Groups will continue to share tactics and resources, making them far more dangerous than if they were operating independently.
Both ransomware and malware used to gain initial compromise will increase in their levels of sophistication and capability.
Specifically, Analyst1 believes ransomware gangs will focus development efforts to automate attacks.
The new capabilities gangs are introducing into their ransomware demonstrate that automation is essential.
Analyst1 believes this trend will continue making ransomware operations more efficient and dangerous.
As automation capabilities increase, the use of affiliate hackers will decrease.
This means ransomware gangs do not have to share profits with affiliates, thus increasing the revenue derived from each attack.
With the decrease in the timeframe it takes to execute each attack, Analyst1 believes the overall volume of attacks will grow, raising the number of victims extorted.
"Police Reportedly Arrest Egregor Ransomware Members" Accessed February 16,2021 https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/news/police-arrest-egregor-ransomware/
“Ransomware + Data Leak Extortion: Origins and Adversaries, Pt.
1,” September 24, 2020. https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/double-trouble-ransomware-data-leak-extortion-part-1/.
"Double Trouble: Ransomware with Data Leak Extortion, Part 2” Accessed March 3, 2021. https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/double-trouble-ransomware-data-leak-extortion-part-2/
"Ransomware gangs team up to form extortion cartel."
“Canon Publicly Confirms August Ransomware Attack, Data Theft.” Accessed March 24, 2021. https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/canon-publicly-confirms-august-ransomware-attack-data-theft/.
“SunCrypt Ransomware Sheds Light on the Maze Ransomware Cartel.” Accessed March 24, 2021. https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/suncrypt-ransomware-sheds-light-on-the-maze-ransomware-cartel/.
“Egregor RaaS Continues the Chaos with Cobalt Strike and Rclone,” November 25, 2020. https://labs.sentinelone.com/egregor-raas-continues-the-chaos-with-cobalt-strike-and-rclone/.
“Ragnar Locker Ransomware Deploys Virtual Machine to Dodge Security.” Sophos News (blog), May 21, 2020. https://news.sophos.com/en-us/2020/05/21/ragnar-locker-ransomware-deploys-virtual-machine-to-dodge-security/.
“Ransomware Group Turns to Facebook Ads — Krebs on Security.” Accessed March 24, 2021. https://krebsonsecurity.com/2020/11/ransomware-group-turns-to-facebook-ads/.
“Ragnar Locker Ransomware Targets MSP Enterprise Support Tools.” Accessed March 24, 2021. https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/ragnar-locker-ransomware-targets-msp-enterprise-support-tools/.
“2020 Global Threat Report.” Cybersecurity Report.
"Ryuk ransomware now self-spreads to other Windows LAN devices."
“LockBit Ransomware Analysis: Rapid Detonation Using a Single Compromised Credential.” Accessed March 26, 2021. https://www.darktrace.com/en/blog/lock-bit-ransomware-analysis-rapid-detonation-using-a-single-compromised-credential.
“LockBit Uses Automated Attack Tools to Identify Tasty Targets.” Sophos News (blog), October 21, 2020. https://news.sophos.com/en-us/2020/10/21/lockbit-attackers-uses-automated-attack-tools-to-identify-tasty-targets/.
“Lockbit Ransomware, Why You No Spread?,” June 10 2020. https://thedfirreport.com/2020/06/10/lockbit-ransomware-why-you-no-spread/.
“SunCrypt Ransomware Sheds Light on the Maze Ransomware Cartel.” Accessed March 26, 2021. https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/suncrypt-ransomware-sheds-light-on-the-maze-ransomware-cartel/.
“Maze ransomware shuts down operations, denies creating cartel.” Accessed March 19, 2021. https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/maze-ransomware-shuts-down-operations-denies-creating-cartel/
Join our email list to receive the latest industry news and threat intelligence developments.
