The Equation Group, classified as an advanced persistent threat, is a highly sophisticated threat actor suspected of being tied to the Tailored Access Operations (TAO) unit of the United States National Security Agency (NSA).
[1][2][3] Kaspersky Labs describes them as one of the most sophisticated cyber attack groups in the world and "the most advanced ... we have seen", operating alongside but always from a position of superiority with the creators of Stuxnet and Flame.
[4][5] Most of their targets have been in Iran, Russia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Syria, and Mali.
The name originated from the group's extensive use of encryption.
By 2015, Kaspersky documented 500 malware infections by the group in at least 42 countries, while acknowledging that the actual number could be in the tens of thousands due to its self-terminating protocol.
In 2017, WikiLeaks published a discussion held within the CIA on how it had been possible to identify the group.
[7] One commenter wrote that "the Equation Group as labeled in the report does not relate to a specific group but rather a collection of tools" used for hacking.
At the Kaspersky Security Analysts Summit held in Mexico on February 16, 2015, Kaspersky Lab announced its discovery of the Equation Group.
According to Kaspersky Lab's report, the group has been active since at least 2001, with more than 60 actors.
[9] The malware used in their operations, dubbed EquationDrug and GrayFish, is found to be capable of reprogramming hard disk drive firmware.
[4] Because of the advanced techniques involved and high degree of covertness, the group is suspected of ties to the NSA, but Kaspersky Lab has not identified the actors behind the group.
The NSA codewords  "STRAITACID" and "STRAITSHOOTER" have been found inside the malware.
In addition, timestamps in the malware seem to indicate that the programmers worked overwhelmingly Monday–Friday in what would correspond to a 08:00–17:00 (8:00 AM - 5:00 PM) workday in an Eastern United States time zone.
Kaspersky's global research and analysis team, otherwise known as GReAT, claimed to have found a piece of malware that contained Stuxnet's "privLib" in 2008.
[12] Specifically it contained the LNK exploit found in Stuxnet in 2010.
Fanny[1] is classified as a worm that affects certain Windows operating systems and attempts to spread laterally via network connection or USB storage.
Kaspersky stated that they suspect that the Equation Group has been around longer than Stuxnet, based on the recorded compile time of Fanny.
F-Secure claims that the Equation Group's malicious hard drive firmware is TAO program "IRATEMONK",[13] one of the items from the NSA ANT catalog exposed in a 2013 Der Spiegel article.
IRATEMONK provides the attacker with an ability to have their software application persistently installed on desktop and laptop computers, despite the disk being formatted, its data erased or the operating system re-installed.
It infects the hard drive firmware, which in turn adds instructions to the disk's master boot record that causes the software to install each time the computer is booted up.
[14] It is capable of infecting certain hard drives from Seagate, Maxtor, Western Digital, Samsung,[14] IBM, Micron Technology and Toshiba.
In August 2016, a hacking group calling itself "The Shadow Brokers" announced that it had stolen malware code from the Equation Group.
[16] The most recent dates of the stolen files are from June 2013, thus prompting Edward Snowden to speculate that a likely lockdown resulting from his leak of the NSA's global and domestic surveillance efforts stopped The Shadow Brokers' breach of the Equation Group.
Exploits against Cisco Adaptive Security Appliances and Fortinet's firewalls were featured in some malware samples released by The Shadow Brokers.
[17] EXTRABACON, a Simple Network Management Protocol exploit against Cisco's ASA software, was a zero-day exploit as of the time of the announcement.
[17] Juniper also confirmed that its NetScreen firewalls were affected.
[18]  The EternalBlue exploit was used to conduct the damaging worldwide WannaCry ransomware attack.
