Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
Proofpoint researchers identified a BazaLoader campaign requiring significant human interaction to execute and install the BazaLoader backdoor.
The threat actor leveraged phone-based customer service representatives to direct victims to unknowingly download and install the malware.
This campaign is representative of a broader trend leveraged by the BazaLoader threat actors using call centers as part of an intricate attack chain.
The entertainment-themed campaign was first observed in early May 2021 and masqueraded as a streaming entertainment service, complete with a slick website featuring fake movies.
The campaign demonstrates an inversely proportional relationship between successful infection rates and asking people to complete complicated steps – the more steps required by the user, the less likely they are to complete the attack chain.
However, despite being counterintuitive, the techniques used by the threat actors in this, and similar, campaigns help bypass fully automated threat detection systems.
Additionally, leveraging a streaming service cancellation lure preys on a growing trend of users cancelling online entertainment following major growth in the industry during 2020.
BazaLoader is a downloader written in C++ that is used to download and execute additional modules.
Proofpoint first observed BazaLoader in April 2020.
It is currently used by multiple threat actors and frequently serves as a loader for disruptive malware including Ryuk and Conti ransomware.
Proofpoint assesses with high confidence there is a strong overlap between the distribution and post-exploitation activity of BazaLoader and threat actors behind The Trick malware, also known as Trickbot.
In the recent BazaLoader campaign, messages purport to be from various senders with subjects such as:
Figure 1: Initial BazaLoader email masquerading as an entertainment streaming service
The emails contain phone numbers and references to the "BravoMovies" company.
The messages purport to inform the target their credit card will be charged unless they cancel their subscription to the service.
If the user calls the phone number provided in the email, a customer service representative will verbally guide the user to the company's alleged website.
The website is a convincing representation of a movie and television streaming service.
The threat actors used fake movie posters obtained from various open-source resources including an advertising agency, the creative social network Behance, and the book “How to Steal a Dog.”
Figure 2: BravoMovies landing page
When the user visits the site mentioned, navigates to the Frequently Asked Questions component of the website, and follows the directions to unsubscribe via the “Subscribtion” page, they will be directed to the download of an Excel Sheet.
Figure 3: FAQ page with cancellation instructions
Figure 4: Fake subscription cancellation page
The Excel sheet contains macros that, if enabled, will download BazaLoader.
Figure 5: Malicious Excel Sheet
At this time, Proofpoint has not observed the second-stage payload in this campaign.
Proofpoint has observed BazarLoader threat actors using the method of phone-based customer service representatives to direct malicious downloads since February 2021.
Security researchers have dubbed this method “BazarCall”.
Proofpoint has previously observed BazaLoader email threat campaigns requiring significant human interaction in order to execute the malware.
The previous campaigns included subscription pharmaceutical services and lingerie and flower orders.
Additionally, Proofpoint researchers have observed similar infection chains leading to the distribution of The Trick instead of BazaLoader.
By leveraging attack chains that require a lot of human interaction, threat actors can bypass some automated threat detection services that only flag on malicious links or attachments in email.
Proofpoint anticipates the threat actors behind BazaLoader and The Trick will continue to use these techniques in future campaigns.
Using entertainment subscription themes may be a timely and effective method for convincing users to engage with the email content and follow-on malicious documents.
During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, subscriptions to online streaming services skyrocketed, surpassing one billion users globally last year.
But according to recent 2021 data, consumers are using fewer services while churning through free subscriptions and cancelling when their trials run out.
BazaLoader threat actors are taking advantage of this human behavior trend in the identified campaign.
2033033 - ET TROJAN BazaLoader CnC Activity
2033034 - ET TROJAN Observed Malicious SSL Cert
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
