New Zealand's Waikato District Health Board (DHB) has been hit with a strain of ransomware that took down most IT services Tuesday morning and drastically reduced services at six of its affiliate hospitals.
The attack disabled all IT services except email.
Patient notes became inaccessible, clinical services were disrupted, and surgeries postponed.
Phone lines went down and hospitals were forced to accept urgent patients only.
Yesterday, Waikato DHB chief executive Kevin Snee told local outlet Stuff that it could be days before systems are running again.
In the meantime, hospital staff have turned to old fashioned pen and paper and referring non-emergency cases elsewhere.
Waikato DHB said today in a canned statement:
Our staff are working to restore the infected systems and on the remediation process.
We are working with the relevant government departments to ensure a secure environment is successfully re-established.
At affiliate Waikato Hospital, 29 out of 102 elective inpatient surgeries were postponed today.
Yesterday, six out of 101 were cancelled.
At affiliate Thames Hospital, all elective surgeries were postponed.
All outpatient activity was deferred at affiliate hospitals in rural areas.
We are currently working with other government departments to investigate the cause, but are working on the theory that the initial incursion was via an email attachment.
A forensic investigation is ongoing.
The head of Waikato DHB has decided not to pay a ransom, a decision also made by the Scottish Environmental Protection Agency when it was attacked by WizardSpider-deployed Conti malware last January.
The Kiwi infection follows WizardSpider's attack last week that resulted in a Irish hospital cancelling outpatient appointments.
Several ransomware operators have pledged that they will not target medical organisations during the current pandemic, but apparently both honour and consistency is lacking among thieves.
The Register understands that institutions and businesses with ties to the hospital system have been alerted to the situation, are aware of the potential for the ransomware infection to spread quickly, and are acting accordingly to protect their operations.
In brief Clearview AI says it has scraped more than 10 billion photographs from people’s public social media accounts for its controversial facial-recognition tool.
The startup’s CEO Hoan Ton-That also told Wired his engineers were working on new features to make blurry images sharper and to make it possible to recognize people even if they were wearing masks.
Its software, often peddled to law enforcement agencies, provides face matching – you show it a still from CCTV, it finds the online profiles of that person – and the larger its database, the more faces it can identify.
The latest steps show Clearview has ignored pressure from Facebook, Google, YouTube, and Twitter, which urged the upstart to stop downloading people’s selfies last year.
Clearview said it also only operates in the US.
Cloudflare is not liable for any copyright infringement for content hosted on websites its content-delivery network supports, a US federal judge ruled this week.
The San Francisco-based concern was sued by wedding dress and gowns wholesalers Mon Cheri Bridals and Maggie Sottero Designs in 2018.
Every time those two businesses shut down copycat retailers that were ripping off their dress designs and selling the clothes online, new websites would pop up to replace the counterfeiters.
In the end, the pair accused Cloudflare of copyright infringement for providing technical services to those sites.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has finalized a plan on global tax laws that could lead to Big Tech paying more in taxes no matter where they operate.
The deal involves 136 countries and jurisdictions that constitute about 90 per cent of Earth's gross domestic product: the US, UK, China, India, and all European Union nations are among those onboard.
The plan imposes a minimum 15 per cent tax rate on corporate profit starting in 2023 on large multinational companies, the OECD said.
The Facebook empire on Friday experienced some aftershocks after its massive Monday outage, leaving some netizens unable to use its apps and websites as expected.
Unlucky, or perhaps lucky, folks found themselves hitting errors when accessing parts of the social network as well as its Instagram, WhatsApp and Messenger units.
Attempts to view notifications, for instance, brought up the message: "Error performing query."
The services appear to be recovering, if they are not already recovered, after about an hour or two of disruption.
Another configuration change was reportedly blamed.
A US nuclear submarine has "struck an object" while submerged in the South China Sea – and the US Navy is insisting that it wasn't a Chinese submarine.
Almost a dozen sailors were reportedly injured in the underwater collision, according to the US Naval Institute's news offshoot.
The submarine was operating in the South China Sea, but was in international waters at the time of the incident, the US Navy said.
The nuclear-powered attack boat is said to be returning to port in Guam, while a statement from the USN said none of the injuries were life-threatening.
The sub's nuclear propulsion plant is said to be undamaged.
Venture capital firms are pouring billions into quantum computing companies, hedging bets that the technology will pay off big time some day.
Rigetti, which makes quantum hardware, announced a $1.5bn merger with Supernova Partners Acquisition Company II, a finance house focusing on strategic acquisitions.
Rigetti, which was valued at $1.04bn before the deal, will now be publicly traded.
Before Rigetti's deal, quantum computer hardware and software companies raked in close to $1.02bn from venture capital investments this year, according to numbers provided to The Register by financial research firm PitchBook.
That was a significant increase from $684m invested by VC firms in 2020, and $188m in 2019.
Sponsored Deciding that running your database in the cloud make sense, is easy enough.
Afterall, who would balk at the prospect of virtually unlimited scale, high availability, performance at internet scale, and the ability to tap multiple database management systems.
And that’s before the prospect of never having to worry about falling foul the licensing police ever again.
But it’s the not the nature of the destination that usually prevents people heading to the cloud.
It’s worrying about how they get there.
Bork – our column of reader-submitted unhappy displays – is celebrating 30 years of Microsoft Money this month with an example of why Windows, .NET and ATMs do not make good bedfellows.
Spotted by Register reader Sam Thompson in the delightful UK city of York (home of the Jorvik Viking Centre and the excellent National Railway Museum), the only thing being dispensed by this cash dispenser is the finest Microsoft-infused bork.
Dell revealed its latest refresh for its Dell EMC Poweredge servers yesterday, emphasizing their small size and reduced latency for uses in places like hospitals, retail space or offices.
Designed for small and medium-sized businesses, the new range, which includes the T150, T550, T350, R250 and R350, is marketed for use either in edge environments, or in a data center.
IT manager, take your pick.
Surprising nobody, the new entry-level servers use Intel Xeon processors, E-2300 processors to be exact.
They are also equipped with what Dell calls "office-friendly acoustics and thermals", but the thing Dell seems proudest of is its shrinking of T350, which is 37 per cent smaller than its predecessor.
Iran, Turkey and both North and South Korea are bases for nation-state cyber attacks, Microsoft has claimed – as well as old favourite Russia.
While more than half of cyberattacks spotted by Redmond came from Russia, of more interest to the wider world is information from the US megacorp's annual Digital Defence Report about lesser-known nation state cyber-attackers.
"After Russia, the largest volume of attacks we observed came from North Korea, Iran and China; South Korea, Turkey (a new entrant to our reporting) and Vietnam were also active but represent much less volume," said MS in a post announcing its findings.
The developers behind popular language education app Duolingo are setting their sights on maths education.
According to an interview with the BBC, founder and chief executive Luis von Ahn sees his company's approach to gamifying education as a way of getting children off distracting social media apps such as TikTok and Instagram.
"But the problem with smartphones is they are a double-edged sword – they also come with interruptive things, like TikTok,” he told the licence fee-funded broadcaster.
The Register - Independent news and views for the tech community.
Biting the hand that feeds IT © 1998–2021
