Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Bank of America insider charged with money laundering for BEC scams
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The City of Tulsa, Oklahoma, is warning residents that their personal data may have been exposed after a ransomware gang published police citations online.
In early May, Tulsa suffered a ransomware attack that led to the City shutting down its network to prevent the spread of the malware.
The attack disrupted Tulsa's online bill payment systems, utility billing, and email, as well as the websites for the City of Tulsa, the Tulsa City Council, Tulsa Police, and the Tulsa 311.
At the time of the attack, it was unknown what ransomware operation was behind the attack on Tulsa.
However, yesterday the Conti Ransomware gang claimed responsibility and published 18,938 of the City's files, mainly police citations and internal Word docu
After the leak of data, the City of Tulsa issued a press release warning that personally identifiable information was exposed in the leaked police citations.
"Today, the City of Tulsa was made aware the persons responsible for the May 2021 City of Tulsa ransomware attack shared more than 18,000 City files via the dark web mostly in the form of police citations and internal department files," said the press release.
"Police citations contain some Personal Identifiable Information (PII) such as name, date of birth, address and driver’s license number.
Police citations do not include social security numbers."
The City is asking "anyone who has filed a police report, received a police citation, made a payment with the City, or interacted with the City in any way where PII was shared" to be extra vigilant against threat actors performing identity theft using the exposed information.
When ransomware gangs publish stolen data, other threat actors download it and use the personal information to conduct their own phishing attacks, scams, and other fraudulent activity.
Due to this, it is vital for those affected to monitor their credit reports and credit card statements for fraud and be on the lookout for suspicious emails or SMS texts claiming to be from the City.
The Week in Ransomware - September 10th 2021 - REvil returns
Conti ransomware prioritizes revenue and cyberinsurance data theft
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
No free year of credit monitoring?
Not that it did much since they sit on this data.
Is this now so commonplace that companies don't care?
We lost all of your data—best of luck.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
