More and more ransomware gangs are now operating sites where they leak sensitive data from victims who refuse to pay the ransom demand.


                        Ransomware: One of the biggest menaces on the web
Everything you need to know about ransomware: how it started, why it's booming, how to protect against it, and what to do if your PC's infected.
It has now become a mainstream tactic for big ransomware groups to create so-called "leak sites" where they upload and leak sensitive documents from companies who refuse to pay the ransomware decryption fee.
These "leak sites" are part of a new trend forming on the cybercriminal underground where ransomware groups are adopting a new tactic called "double extortion."
The perfect example of how ransomware gangs are currently using "leak sites" and "double extortion" to put pressure on victims to pay is the case of the University of Utah.
Last week, the university's management admitted to paying $457,000 to a ransomware gang even if they recovered their encrypted files using previous backups.
In a statement posted on its website, the university justified its payment by revealing that the ransomware gang threatened to leak files containing sensitive student data online if the university did not agree to pay regardless if they recovered their original files.
Such incidents are becoming more common these days as more and more ransomware groups shift to operating a leak site to put additional pressure on victims.
The good news is that not all ransomware gangs operate leak sites.
However, this number has been steadily growing since December 2019, when the operators of the Maze ransomware launched the first-ever leak site.
Today, the list of ransomware gangs who operate leak sites includes the likes of Ako, Avaddon, CLOP, Darkside, DoppelPaymer, Maze, Mespinoza (Pysa), Nefilim, NetWalker, RagnarLocker, REvil (Sodinokibi), and Sekhmet.
Some of these groups are small-time operators that even malware analysts have barely heard of, but some, like Maze, DoppelPaymer, REvil, and NetWalker, are some of today's largest ransomware threat actors, responsible for a large chunk of ransomware attacks.
Other groups, like BitPaymer, WastedLocker, LockBit, ProLock, and the Dharma family, have not yet adopted leak sites.
But last week, we had another major ransomware group shift to this double-extortion tactic and launch a leak site.
Know as Conti, this is a relatively new ransomware strain.
Discovered by a malware analyst going by the pseudonym of BreachKey, the Conti leak site is available at different URLs on both the public internet and the dark web.
BreachKey says the site already lists 26 companies that have fallen victim to the group's attacks and have declined to pay the ransom, and that for each company listed on the site, the Conti group has leaked documents obtained from their networks.
All in all, the launch of yet another leak site shows that the double-extortion scheme is here to stay with ransomware gangs.
This new trend also means changes need to take place in how companies treat ransomware attacks.
While in the past, victim companies only had to recover files and get back to day-to-day operations, today, ransomware attacks almost always involve the theft of sensitive corporate data, employee or customer personal details.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
