A council in Adelaide's south is up and running again after cyber attack just before Christmas locked down its IT systems and forced staff to start their holidays earlier than planned.
City of Onkaparinga mayor Erin Thompson said its systems fell victim to the so-called Ryuk ransomware, which has also hit "other government organisations around the world", on December 14.
"It disabled quite few of our systems," she told ABC Radio Adelaide.
"Our phones and our emails were down for a period of time and our IT guys had to go through and individually restore every server and every different device across the council.
"It was a big hit for the council and it took a lot to get it up and running."
Ms Thompson said public computers and printers at its libraries would remain out of order for the next day or two.
She said the attack occurred while the council was operating with skeleton staff, and many took the opportunity to start their leave earlier in response.
Ms Thompson said it was the same ransomware that hit the City of New Orleans in mid-December.
Inside a massive cyber attack on the Australian National University that risks compromising high-ranking officials across the globe.
"It would have been particularly tough for them because they've also got police and hospital services," she said.
"We're still investigating what happened here, but we are about to launch a new IT system anyway.
"We know that it has far stronger security elements in place and that if it had been in place already, this probably wouldn't have happened."
The council said forensic investigations indicated that no personal information had been compromised in the attack.
Adelaide technology consultant Richard Pascoe said Ryuk had been used to hit more than 100 businesses since 2018 and had caused losses of some $3.7 million so far.
"If it was Ryuk, and there's been lots of examples around the world, there is ransom written into the virus," he said.
All individuals and organisations connected to the internet are vulnerable to cyber attack – and the threat is growing.
"When they lock everything down you get a message on the screen telling you how to go along and pay that ransom, and then you basically get a key back that tells you how to unlock everything."
Mr Pascoe said the City of Onkaparinga was the first Adelaide organisation he had heard of that had been affected.
"They would have already been infected and somebody would have opened an email, simple as that, which would have triggered the whole virus to be set off in the council," he said.
Ms Thompson said the council had not been asked for a ransom, but had that happened, "it would have been a matter for our insurance".
We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.
This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.
AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)
