Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Bank of America insider charged with money laundering for BEC scams
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The Conti ransomware gang has released a free decryptor for Ireland’s health service, the HSE, but warns that they will still sell or release the stolen data.
Ireland's HSE, the country's publicly funded healthcare system, and the Department of Health were attacked by the Conti ransomware gang last Friday.
While the Department of Health was able to block the attack, the HSE was not as lucky and was forced to shut down their IT systems to prevent further devices from being encrypted.
This IT outage has led to widespread disruption in the country's healthcare system as the HSE recovers from backups and the concerns that the ransomware gang would soon release patient's data.
Today, the ransomware gang posted a link to a free decryptor in their negotiation chat page for the HSE that can be used use to recover encrypted files for free.
However, the threat actors warn that they will still be selling or publishing the stolen private data if a ransom of $19,999,000 is not paid.
"We are providing the decryption tool for your network for free.
But you should understand that we will sell or publish a lot of private data if you will not connect us and try to resolve the situation," says the Conti ransomware gang on their Tor payment site.
As the ransomware sample used in the attacks on HSE is publicly available, security researcher MalwareHunterTeam and BleepingComputer have confirmed that the decryptor can decrypt files that were encrypted during this attack.
Since the initial attack, there has not been any further conversation between HSE, or someone else who had access to the chat, and the Conti ransomware gang.
The safest approach continues to be to reimage all of their servers and recover from backups, but the decryptor can be used as needed to recover data missing from backups.
The government of Ireland is aware of the free decryptor but will be performing a technical review of the tool for malicious properties before using it.
"The HSE is aware that an encryption key have been provided," the Ireland Department of Health told BleepingComputer in a statement.
"However further investigations have to be conducted to assess if it will work safely, prior to attempting to use it on HSE systems."
As threat actor's decryptors are known to be buggy and not optimized to decrypt files quickly, cybersecurity firm Emsisoft has created a 'Universal Decryptor' two times faster when decrypting files.
Ireland's HSE can use Emisoft's decryptor free of charge as part of their ongoing free assistance program to healthcare providers.
While the HSE can now recover encrypted files for free from prior activities of the ransomware gang, the release of the alleged 700 GB of stolen data is likely imminent.
Update 5/20/21 2:10 PM EST: Added statement and information about Emsisoft's Universal Decryptor.
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
JVCKenwood hit by Conti ransomware claiming theft of 1.5TB data
RansomEXX ransomware Linux encryptor may damage victims' files
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
