Log in to your Bitdefender account and manage security for what matters.
Complete protection and unlimited VPN for 10 users.
Complete protection for 5 or 10 devices.
Windows only security with limited VPN.
Basic protection for Windows only.
Basic protection for Mac only.
Ultra-fast VPN that keeps your online identity and activities safe from hackers, ISP's and snoops.
Live Support offered by certified experts
Live Support offered by certified experts
Live Support offered by certified experts
Live Support offered by certified experts
Prevention, Hardening, Risk, and Incident Analytics
Advanced attack visibility with guided investigation
Integrated Prevention, EDR and Risk Analytics
Next-Gen AV for All Infrastructures
Next-Gen AV for Small Businesses
Protection for Virtual Servers and Desktops
Purpose-built Container and Linux security
Log in to your Bitdefender account and manage security for what matters.
A group of sophisticated threat actors known as OceanLotus or PhantomLance has recently become known for disseminating advanced Android threats via official and third-party marketplaces since 2014.
They have sought to remotely control infected devices, steal confidential data, install applications and launch arbitrary code.
While security
researchers have recently documented the group and their campaigns, a
Bitdefender investigation has revealed 35 new malicious samples, and
evidence that the campaign may have used a legitimate and potentially
stolen digital certificate to sign some samples.
The modus operandi for
the APT group involved spreading tainted Android apps through Google Play and
third-party marketplaces by initially uploading a clean version and then adding
malware.
Security researchers
have linked attribution to the OceanLotus APT group to the shared
infrastructure between the Android malware and past command and control domains
used for Windows-based advanced threats that have historically targeted
Microsoft users.
It is believed these older campaigns also had connections to
the Hacking Team group, which is known to have served the APT32 group.
While OceanLotus targets victims mostly from Africa and Asia, Bitdefender telemetry also indicates scans in countries such as Japan, South Korea, Vietnam, Germany and India.
This threat is detected as Android.Trojan.OceanLotus by Bitdefender.
The oldest sample
found in the Bitdefender repository (APK MD5: 315f8e3da94920248676b095786e26ad) and associated with the OceanLotus APT group seems to have
first landed on Google Play in April 2014.
Previous estimates of
the campaign’s origin date the oldest known Google Play sample to December
2014.
According to the
internal zip file timestamp, the sample was built on 2014.04.05 and
ended up in our collection just days after.
An interesting observation is that this sample is signed with a certificate belonging to VL Corporation.
This certificate was generated on July 2013, and over 100 different applications on Google Play, other than OceanLotus Malware, seem to have been using it until 2014.
This suggests that the cybercriminal group may have successfully smuggled tainted apps into Google Play using a valid certificate.
It’s likely that he certificate was leaked and abused by the APT group.
Currently, none of the over 100 applications that were in Google Play and signed with this certificate still have it.
In terms of telemetry, over the
past 3 months alone we have seen 25 reports involving this threat, mostly in
the US, Japan and South Korea.
Granted, it’s likely that the reports in the US
may not be actual devices, but Amazon-hosted Android machines rigged
to run the samples potentially for security analysis.
It’s not uncommon for
security researchers to perform this type of sandboxing, especially when trying
to pull indicators of compromise or study malicious behavior.
However, reports from South Korea and Japan do indicate at least a limited number of devices have recently encountered OceanLotus APT samples.
In terms of spread,
while security researchers already reported that distribution occurred through
both the official Google Play marketplace and third-party marketplaces, some
that mirror Google Play still host these samples.
This means that, while Google
does a great job at timely managing their app collection and responding to
input from security researchers and vendors, third-party marketplaces remove
these threats slowly – if ever – potentially exposing users to malware,
indefinitely.
Some examples of third-party marketplaces that still host these malicious samples include:
While there’s already a comprehensive list of samples attributed to the OceanLotus APT group, for which we know they have been in Google Play, we’ve added the following that have also been confirmed on Google Play at some point.
For the full list of additional new samples (md5) found by Bitdefender researchers and attributed to the OceanLotus APT, please check below:
It’s common for attackers to
submit a clean version to Google Play, then wait a random amount of time and
simply update the application with malicious code.
This tactic seems to have
been used by the cybercriminal group as well.
For example, the application net.vilakeyice.openglplugin (OpenGLPlugin) was first uploaded as clean, on August 5th 2018, and then the malicious payload was introduced on August 21st.
The payload is then decrypted and loaded dynamically within the application.
If older samples had the decryption key embedded locally within the original clean application, newer samples no longer store it locally, as they seem to receive the decryption key along with the malicious payload.
While attribution for these
Android malware samples has already been the subject of analysis from the
security industry, with the OceanLotus APT group tagged as responsible, the
fact that samples still exist on third-party marketplaces should raise red
flags.
Some samples that were on
Google Play at some point are currently still available on third-party
markets, including on Amazon.
In regions around the world where access to content from the
official Google Play marketplace may be restricted, users still risk infection
with this type of malware.
In this particular example with Amazon India, the developer name is Caleb Eisenhauer (a fake name) and the application seems to have been published on February 16th 2020.
The email address associated with the account (malcesshartspur@gmail.com) sends to a privacy policy hosted on GitHub (https://github.com/malcesshartspur).
It’s likely that
similar fake developer accounts exist, all spreading various samples on
third-party marketplaces with the potential to infect victims over an extended
period of time if not removed.
Liviu Arsene is the proud owner of the secret to the fountain of never-ending energy.
That's what's been helping him work his everything off as a passionate tech news editor for the past few years.
