Join thousands of people who receive the latest breaking cybersecurity news every day.
The administrator of your personal data will be Threatpost, Inc., 500 Unicorn Park, Woburn, MA 01801.
Detailed information on the processing of personal data can be found in the privacy policy.
In addition, you will find them in the message confirming the subscription to the newsletter.
The administrator of your personal data will be Threatpost, Inc., 500 Unicorn Park, Woburn, MA 01801.
Detailed information on the processing of personal data can be found in the privacy policy.
In addition, you will find them in the message confirming the subscription to the newsletter.
The OceanLotus APT is using two new loaders which use steganography to read their encrypted payloads.
The advanced persistent threat (APT) group OceanLotus has switched up its tactics to use steganography to cloak encrypted payloads within .png image files.
Researchers said that they discovered the OceanLotus APT group – a Vietnam-linked cyber-espionage group also known as APT32 – using the tactic to hide their payloads since September 2018.
After victims click on malicious files sent via phishing emails, a loader will execute a next-stage encrypted payload that is obfuscated using steganography – a method of hiding code within an image.
Once decoded, decrypted, and executed, the payload will deploy the APT’s backdoor.
“The threat actor will first encode an image with their payload of choice, before distributing it with a simple decoder to a target,” Tom Bonner, BlackBerry Cylance director of threat research, told Threatpost.
“There are many tools that can be used to encode/decode data in images, but the OceanLotus implementation appears to be bespoke, and therefore not easily prone to detection by standard analysis tools.”
OceanLotus, active since at least 2014, has targeted private sector industries and foreign governments, primarily in Southeast Asian countries including Vietnam or the Philippines, according to Bonner.
OceanLotus actors are known to deliver their malicious attachments via spear phishing emails.
In the latest campaigns launched by the APT, researchers said that they observed two new obfuscated loaders deploying two types of APT32-specific backdoors.
These loaders have been observed active since September 2018 – but this is the first time that their existence has been reported, researchers said.
The first steganography-based loader deploys a version of a backdoor dubbed “Denes.” The malware loader first attempts to imitate McAfee’s McVsoCfg dynamic link library (DLL) file, researchers said.
That tricks the legitimate “On Demand Scanner” executable on the system to side-load the malicious file, which then loads a next-stage encrypted payload.
That payload is stored in a separate .png image file and uses steganography to avoid detection.
“The user does not interact with the image (nor is the image sent via email), rather the image is used to hide the payload from analysts/tools/monitoring software,” Bonner told Threatpost.
“In a way, the payload is hiding in plain sight, as an image carrying a payload will be virtually indistinguishable from an original image.”
Researchers said that one of the payloads they encountered for instance was encoded inside an image of a popular Japanese mange series character (Kaito Kuroba).
The encoded payload is also encrypted with AES128 and further obfuscated with XOR in an attempt to fool steganography detection tools, researchers said.
Once uploaded, the payload is then decrypted.
Here, the payload is extracted from the .png image after the victim clicks on the phishing email.
The .png image for this second loader (left) appears to have been taken from an inspirational quotes website, researchers said.
While steganography is an old-school tactic, bad actors are continuing to push the boundaries when using steganography to conceal their malware.
Steganography  has been used in several campaigns over the past year, including in uploaded images on trusted Google sites and even in memes on Twitter.
Researchers have spotted notable code overlap between the Sunburst backdoor and a known Turla weapon.
Researchers at Recorded Future report a rise in cracked Cobalt Strike and other open-source adversarial tools with easy-to-use interfaces.
The widespread compromise affecting key government agencies is ongoing, according to the U.S. government.
Join thousands of people who receive the latest breaking cybersecurity news every day.
The rare #UEFI #bootkit drops a fully featured #backdoor on PCs and gains the ultimate persistence by modifying the… https://t.co/YXOpYszUZc
Get the latest breaking news delivered daily to your inbox.
The First Stop For Security News
Infosec Insider content is written by a trusted community of Threatpost cybersecurity subject matter experts.
Each contribution has a goal of bringing a unique voice to important cybersecurity topics.
Content strives to be of the highest quality, objective and non-commercial.
Sponsored Content is paid for by an advertiser.
Sponsored content is written and edited by members of our sponsor community.
This content creates an opportunity for a sponsor to provide insight and commentary from their point-of-view directly to the Threatpost audience.
The Threatpost editorial team does not participate in the writing or editing of Sponsored Content.
