Toyota Japan says hackers might have stolen details of 3.1 million Toyota and Lexus car owners.
Japanese car maker Toyota announced its second data breach today, making it the second cyber-security incident the company acknowledged in the past five weeks.
While the first incident took place at its Australian subsidiary, today's breach was announced by the company's main offices in Japan.
The company said hackers breached its IT systems and accessed data belonging to several sales subsidiaries.
The list includes Toyota Tokyo Sales Holdings, Tokyo Tokyo Motor, Tokyo Toyopet, Toyota Tokyo Corolla, Nets Toyota Tokyo, Lexus Koishikawa Sales, Jamil Shoji (Lexus Nerima), and Toyota West Tokyo Corolla.
Toyota said the servers that hackers accessed stored sales information on up to 3.1 million customers.
The carmaker said there's an ongoing investigation to find out if hackers exfiltrated any of the data they had access to.
Customer financial details were not stored on the hacked servers, Toyota said.
However, the company didn't say what type of info hackers might have accessed either.
"We apologize to everyone who has been using Toyota and Lexus vehicles for the great concern," a Toyota spokesperson said today in a message to the press.
"We take this situation seriously, and will thoroughly implement information security measures at dealers and the entire Toyota Group."
This is the second cyber-security the company has announced this year, after disclosing a similar incident in late February, but affecting its Australian branch.
The attack on its Australian office was more disruptive in nature, bringing down Toyota Australia's ability to handle sales and deliver new cars, and has been attributed by some industry experts to APT32 (OceanLotus), a Vietnamese cyber-espionage unit with a known focus on the automotive industry.
Experts suggested that APT32 hackers might have targeted Toyota's Australia branch as a way to get into Toyota's more secure central network in Japan.
At the time, Toyota declined to confirm any of these theories and attribute the attack to APT32 hackers.
However, the company did say that it would start an internal audit of its IT systems following the attack on its Australian branch, and today's announcement only pours fuel on the APT32 theories.
The scope and scale of #APT32's 🇻🇳 activity remains largely unchanged from: https://t.co/ktit15l0si"Since at least 2014, FireEye has observed APT32 targeting foreign corporations with a vested interest in Vietnam’s manufacturing, consumer products, and hospitality sectors."
Updated on March 30: On the same day that Toyota Japan announced its data breach, Toyota Vietnam and Toyota Thailand also announced cyber-security incidents, albeit without any details about the hacks and if they're connected to the Toyota Japan incident.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
