This post, the second of two parts, was written by Christiaan Beek, Raj Samani, and Shane Shook.
In our first post, we examined the evolution of the botnet.
In this follow-up we will discuss a new botnet operating model that allows an attacker to get an insider’s view of infected organizations without actually being an insider—all while remaining undetected and manipulating data for financial gain.
Fiction or reality?
Many examples of attacks by botnet malware resulting in financial theft or accounts fraud have been published that trace the evolution of “personal” information stealers into “corporate” information stealers.
In 2009 Patco Construction, in Sanford, Maine, was robbed of $588,000.
In that same year, US law enforcement arrested individuals associated with the incursions via botnets into 390 companies in the United States, with estimated related losses at more than $70 million.
Similar activities occurred in 2012 when Tennessee Electric Co. lost almost $328,000 after their bank account was taken over by cyber thieves.
Other examples abound, but the evolution of the use of botnets continues as more and more corporate services are facilitated online.
In 2014 Salesforce.com users were targeted by malware configured to automatically steal login details, and even bypass two-factor authentication.
Numerous examples of malware configurations to target corporate financial, securities, and other web services are available through cursory Internet searches.
Dyre samples include more than 450 URLs intended to be automatically monitored for credentials theft, including corporate and personal web services.
Some of the configured URLs include nonspecific wildcards to harvest credentials used for popular corporate financial and HR applications.
In May, the Australian Federal Police released a report concerning corporate securities trading fraud in which malware actors were targeting nontraditional financial platforms in Australia.
Investigations into large sums of money fraudulently transferred from various Australian financial institutions using corporate accounts commenced in February 2014.
The investigations showed that two brokerage services were making unusual transactions.
Forensic investigations revealed the presence of “financial” malware.
The malware, in this instance, was defined as malicious software that has been designed to steal, alter, and compromise financial transactions and credentials.
Some results from the investigation:
Logins occurring in excess of a month prior to the first fraudulent transaction.
Logins occurring while the broker was listed as absent from work.
Logins occurring between specific periods consistent with known Eastern European actors.
Logins using specific user-agent strings consistent with known Eastern European actors.
Numerous forged authorizations had been processed without question.
Market information stealer: These seek to help a subscriber gain insights into valuable sensitive and highly protected information.
These malware are less focused on credential theft, although that is an important feature for subscribers to discern the financial performance of their victims.
Instead the malware facilitates managed access to specific information stores or screens from which time-sensitive information can be surreptitiously observed or copied.
In the preceding picture, the botmaster has control over computers in two banks and a trading firm, representing capital markets analysts and a corporate controller.
The botmaster is simply providing access to a subscriber (“Malicious Trader”), who can see sensitive information in each company, a kind of “Botnet-Flix.” With that access, the Malicious Trader can use the information to anticipate the financial market and start actions that will give him, or the organization he’s working for, a financial gain.
The crimes committed are not only the intrusion into the bank and trading firm computers, but also the exploitation of the proprietary and sensitive information for gain.
Although this seems an incredible situation, such facilities are provided by a long history of botnet malware that enable automated or manual access to infected computers.
Examples of malware features
The following table shows an overview of banking botnets as of March and the plug-ins and functions available to operators or subscribers:
