This blog post was written by Rick Simon.
At the RSA Conference 2016 in San Francisco, Chris Young, GM and SVP of McAfee, said that one of the best ways to improve response time to attacks and overall awareness of attacks and adversaries is through the timely sharing of threat intelligence.
He also talked about McAfee’s responsibility as a leading security vendor to set an example for the industry by pushing the boundaries of threat intelligence sharing.
We believe that by sharing threat intelligence, we can shift the balance of power away from the adversaries and back to us, the defenders.
By crowdsourcing threat data and leveraging collaborative analytics, we can “connect the dots” to form better pictures of the attacks and adversaries that surround our customers.
Collectively, we can deliver better protection.
Leading by example, McAfee partnered with other leading cybersecurity solution providers in 2014 to form the Cyber Threat Alliance (CTA).
CTA members share threat information, raising our situational awareness about advanced threats, including the motivations, tactics, and the actors behind them.
Once shared, CTA members can automatically deploy prevention controls to stop the identified threats.
Based on collaborative research, we also published a joint threat research report late last year around our collective analysis of the CryptoWall Version 3 campaign.
McAfee is also helping drive the development of voluntary standards for those who wish to establish threat intelligence sharing organizations.
We lead several committees within the Information Sharing and Analysis Organization (ISAO) Standards Organization, established through a US Presidential order in 2015.
The ISAO SO’s objective is to encourage threat information sharing within the private sector and between the private sector and government.
To gain a better understanding of threat intelligence sharing and McAfee’s leadership in driving its development, we recently created a web page that educates and shows how we use threat intelligence sharing to better protect our customers.
You can visit the page here.
