Over the last few months, we have seen attackers take advantage of the pandemic as a cover to launch cyberattacks.
One such example is a campaign that McAfee Advanced Threat Research (ATR) observed as an increase in malicious cyber activity targeting the Aerospace & Defense industry.
In this campaign McAfee ATR discovered a series of malicious documents containing job postings taken from leading defense contractors to be used as lures, in a very targeted fashion.
This type of campaign has appeared before, in 2017 and 2019 using similar techniques, but the 2020 campaign has some distinct differences in implants, infrastructure and spear phishing lures.
For a more detailed analysis of this campaign please see the McAfee ATR blog.
This blog is focused on how to build an adaptable security architecture to increase your resilience against these types of attacks and specifically, how McAfee’s portfolio delivers the capability to prevent, detect and respond against the tactics and techniques used in the Operation North Star campaign.
As always, building adaptable defensive architecture starts with intelligence.
In most organizations, the Security Operations team is responsible for threat intelligence analysis, as well as threat and incident response.
McAfee Insights is a great tool for the threat intel analyst and threat responder.
The Insights Dashboard identifies prevalence and severity of emerging threats across the globe which enables the Security Operations Center (SOC) to prioritize threat response actions and gather relevant cyber threat intelligence (CTI) associated with the threat, in this case the Operation North Star campaign.
The CTI is provided in the form of technical Indicators of Compromise (IOCs) as well as MITRE ATT&CK framework tactics and techniques.
As a threat intel analyst or responder, you can drill down to gather more specific information on Operation North Star, such as prevalence and links to other sources of information.
You can further drill down to gather more specific actionable intelligence such as indicators of compromise and tactics/techniques aligned to the MITRE ATT&CK framework.
From the McAfee ATR blog, you can see that Operation North Star leverages tactics and techniques common to other APT campaigns, such as spear phishing for Initial Access, exploited system tools and signed binaries, modification of Registry Keys/Startup folder for persistence and encoded traffic for command and control.
Today’s digital enterprise is a hybrid environment of on-premise systems and cloud services with multiple entry points for attacks like Operation North Star.
The work from home operating model forced by COVID-19 has only expanded the attack surface and increased risk for successful spear phishing attacks if organizations did not adapt their security posture and increase training for remote workers.
Mitigating the risk of attacks like Operation North Star requires a security architecture with the right controls at the device, on the network and in security operations (sec ops).
The Center for Internet Security (CIS) Top 20 Cyber Security Controls provides a good guide to build that architecture.
The following outlines the key security controls needed at each layer of the architecture to protect your enterprise against Operation North Star tactics and techniques.
According to Threat Intelligence and Research, the initial access is performed either through vulnerability exploitation or spear phishing attachments.
As attackers can quickly change spear phishing attachments or link locations, it is important to have layered defenses that include user awareness training and response procedures, intelligence and behavior-based malware defenses on email systems, web proxy and endpoint systems, and finally sec ops playbooks for early detection and response against suspicious email attachments or other phishing techniques The following chart summarizes the controls expected to have the most effect against initial stage techniques and the McAfee solutions to implement those controls where possible.
