The NetWalker ransomware, initially known as Mailto, was first detected in August 2019.
Since then, new variants were discovered throughout 2019 and the beginning of 2020, with a strong uptick noticed in March of this year.
NetWalker has noticeably evolved to a more stable and robust ransomware-as-a-service (RaaS) model, and McAfee research suggests that the malware operators are targeting and attracting a broader range of technically advanced and enterprising criminal affiliates.
McAfee Advanced Threat Research (ATR) discovered a large sum of bitcoins linked to NetWalker which suggest its extortion efforts are effective and that many victims have had no option other than to succumb to its criminal demands.
For more details on NetWalker, see the McAfee ATR blog here.
We do not want you to be one of those victims, so this blog is focused on how to build an adaptable security architecture to defeat this threat and, specifically, how McAfee’s portfolio delivers the capability to prevent, detect and respond to NetWalker ransomware.
As always, building adaptable defensive architecture starts with intelligence.
In most organizations, the Security Operations team is responsible for threat intelligence analysis, as well as threat and incident response.
The Preview of McAfee MVISION Insights is a sneak peek of some of MVISION Insights capabilities for the threat intel analyst and threat responder.
The preview identifies the prevalence and severity of select top emerging threats across the globe which enables the Security Operations Center (SOC) to prioritize threat response actions and gather relevant cyber threat intelligence (CTI) associated with the threat, in this case NetWalker ransomware.
The CTI is provided in the form of technical Indicators of Compromise (IOCs) as well as MITRE ATT&CK framework tactics and techniques.
As a threat intel analyst or responder, you can drill down to gather more specific information on NetWalker, such as prevalence and links to other sources of information.
As a threat intel analyst or responder, you can further drill down to gather more specific actionable intelligence on NetWalker, such as indicators of compromise and tactics/techniques aligned to the MITRE ATT&CK framework.
From MVISION Insights preview, you can see that NetWalker leverages tactics and techniques common to other ransomware attacks, such as spear phishing attachments for Initial Access, use of PowerShell for deployment, modification of Registry Keys/Startup folder for persistence and encryption of files for impact of course.
Today’s digital enterprise is a hybrid environment of on-premise systems and cloud services with multiple entry points for attacks like NetWalker.
The work from home operating model forced by COVID-19 has only expanded the attack surface and increased the risk for successful ransomware attack if organizations did not adapt their security posture.
Mitigating the risk of attacks like NetWalker requires a security architecture with the right controls at the device, on the network and in security operations (sec ops).
The Center for Internet Security (CIS) Top 20 Cyber Security Controls provides a good guide to build that architecture.
For ransomware, and NetWalker in particular, the controls must be layered throughout the enterprise.
The following outlines the key security controls needed at each layer of the architecture to protect your enterprise against ransomware.
To assess your capability against NetWalker, you must match your existing controls against the attack stages we learned from the Preview of MVISION Insights.
For detailed analysis on the NetWalker ransomware attack, see McAfee ATR’s blog but, for simplicity, we matched the attack stages to the MITRE ATT&CK Framework below.
According to Threat Intelligence and Research, the initial access is performed either through vulnerability exploitation or spear phishing attachments.
The following chart summarizes the controls expected to have the most effect against initial stage techniques and the McAfee solutions to implement those controls where possible.
