It is rare to be provided an inside view on how major cyber espionage campaigns are conducted within the digital realm.
The only transparency afforded is a limited view of victims, a malware sample, and perhaps the IP addresses of historical command and control (C2) infrastructure.
The Operation North Star campaign we detailed earlier this year provided just this.
This campaign used social media sites, spearphishing and weaponized documents to target employees working for organizations in the defense sector.
This early analysis focused on the adversary’s initial intrusion vectors, described the first stages of how an implant was installed, and how it interacted with the Command and Control (C2) server.
However, that initial disclosure left gaps such as the existence of secondary payload, and additional insights into how the threat actors carried out their operations and who they targeted.
The updated report takes a unique deep dive following our identification of previously undiscovered information into the backend infrastructure run by the adversaries.
These findings reveal a previously undiscovered secondary implant known as Torisma.
However, more telling are the operational security measures that were undertaken to remain hidden on compromised systems.
In particular, we saw the application of an Allow and Block list of victims to ensure the attacker’s secondary payload did not make its way to organizations that were not targeted.
This tells us that certainly there has been a degree of technical innovation exhibited not only with the use of a template injection but also in the operations run by the adversary.
Finally, while we cannot confirm the extent of the success of the adversary’s attacks, our analysis of their C2 log files indicate that they launched attacks on IP-addresses belonging to internet service providers (ISPs) in Australia, Israel and Russia, and defense contractors based in Russia and India.
The findings within this report are intended to provide you, the reader, unique insights into the technology and tactics the adversary used to target and compromise systems across the globe.
Operation North Star C2 infrastructure consisted of compromised domains in Italy and other countries.
Compromised domains belonged, for example, to an apparel company, an auction house and printing company.
These URLs hosted malicious DOTM files, including a malicious ASP page.
hxxp://fabianiarte.com:443/uploads/docs/bae_defqa_logo.jpg
hxxps://fabianiarte.com/uploads/imgproject/912EC803B2CE49E4A541068D495AB570.jpg
https://www.fabianiarte.com/include/action/inc-controller-news.asp
The domain fabianiarte.com (fabianiarte.it) was compromised to host backend server code and malicious DOTM files.
This domain hosted DOTM files that were used to mimic defense contractors’ job profiles as observed in Operation North Star, but the domain also included some rudimentary backend server code that we suspect was used by the implant.
Log files and copies appeared in the wild pertaining to the intrusion of this domain and provided further insight.
According to our analysis of this cache of data this site was compromised to host code on 7/9/2020.
Two DOTM files were discovered in this cache of logs and other intrusion data.
These DOTM files belong to campaigns 510 and 511 based on the hard-coded value in the malicious VB scripts.
22it-34165.jpg
21it-23792.jpg
Developments in Anti-Analysis Techniques
During our analysis we uncovered two DOTM files as part of the cache of data pertaining to the backend.
In analyzing first stage implants associated with the C2 server over a period of seven months, we found that there were further attempts by the adversary to obfuscate and confuse analysts.
Having appeared in July, these DOTM files contained first stage implants embedded in the same location as we documented in our initial research.
However, previous implants from other malicious DOTM files were double base64 encoded and the implants themselves were not further obfuscated.
However, there were some notable changes in the method that differed from those detailed in our initial research:
The first stage implant that is nested in the DOTM file, is using triple base64 encoding in the Visual Basic Macro
The extracted DLL (desktop.dat) is packed with the Themida packer attempting to make analysis more difficult.
The first stage implant extracted from the DOTM files contains an encrypted configuration file and an intermediate dropper DLL.
The configuration file, once decrypted, contains information for the first stage implant.
The information includes the URL for the C2 and the decryption keys for the second stage payload called “Torisma”.
Contents of decrypted configuration
Because the configuration file contains information on how to communicate with the C2, it also stores the parameter options (ned, gl, hl).
In this case, we see an unknown fourth parameter known as nl, however it does not appear to be implemented in the server-side ASP code.
It is possible that the adversary may have intended to implement it in the future.
Appearance of nl parameter
In addition, analysis of the backend components for this compromised server enables us to draw a timeline of activity on how long the attacker had access.
For example, the DOTM files mentioned above were placed on the compromised C2 server in July 2020.
Some of the main malicious components involved in the backend operation were installed on this server in January 2020, indicating that this C2 server had been running for seven months.
Inc-Controller-News.ASP
As we covered in our initial Operation North Star research, the overall attack contained a first stage implant delivered by the DOTM files.
That research found specific parameters used by the implant and that were sent to the C2 server.
Further analysis of the implant “wsdts.db” in our case, revealed that it gathers information of the victim’s system.
For example:
Get system disks information
Get Free disk space information
Get Computer name and (logged in) Username
Process information
When this information is gathered, they will be communicated towards the C2 server using the parameters (ned, gl, hl).
These parameters are interpreted by an obfuscated server-side ASP page, based on the values sent will depend on the actions taken upon the victim.
The server-side ASP page was placed on the compromised server January 2020.
Additionally, based on this information the adversary is targeting Windows servers running IIS to install C2 components.
The server-side ASP page contains a highly obfuscated VBScript embedded that, once decoded, reveals code designed to interact with the first stage implant.
The ASP page is encoded with the VBScript.Encode method resulting in obfuscated VBScript code.
The first stage implant interacts with the server-side ASP page through the usage of these finite parameters.
Encoded VBScript
Once the VBScript has been decoded it reveals a rather complex set of functions.
These functions lead to installing additional stage implants on the victim’s system.
These implants are known as Torisma and Doris, both of which are base64 encoded.
They are loaded directly into memory via a binary stream once conditions have been satisfied based on the logic contained within the script.
Decoded VBScript
The ASP server-side script contains code to create a binary stream to where we suspect the Torisma implant is written.
We also discovered that the Torisma implant is embedded in the ASP page and decoding the base64 blob reveals an AES encrypted payload.
This ASP page contains evidence that indicates the existence of logic that decodes this implant and deliver it to the victim.
