Critical infrastructure on the frontline
Stop being an easy target
Can your security keep up with you?
Take control of your ERP security
Vulnerability and compliance management system.
Advanced sandbox with customizable virtual environments
Full-featured SIEM for mid-sized IT infrastructures.
Knows your infrastructure, delivers pinpoint detection.
Cyberthreat detection and incident response in ICS.
Multilayered protection against malware attacks.
Intelligent protection of business applications.
NDR system to detect attacks on the perimeter and inside the network.
Full Range of ICS-specific Security Services
Security Analysis and Compliance Audit
Independent Expert Analysis of Your Source Code
Black Box and White Box Analysis
Secure Application Development at Your Organization
Upgrade Your View of Perimeter Security

    At the end of September 2020, Positive Technologies Expert Security Center (PT Expert Security Center, PT ESC) was involved in the investigation of an incident in one of the largest pharmaceutical companies.

    At the end of the article, PT ESC provides a list of the group's TTPs and indicators of compromise that can be used by cybersecurity specialists to identify traces of the group's attacks and search for threats in their infrastructure.

    In one of the cases, a malicious document was received via Telegram.
Note that both documents were received by the victims over the weekend.

    It was not possible to gain full access to all the files listed above during the incident investigation.
Notably, the backdoor monitors RDP sessions on the compromised computer using WTSEnumerateSessionsW  (see the Trojan-Backdoor CommsCacher section).

    According to the proxy server logs, the compromised computers tried to connect to the address forecareer[.
]com:443, which was not detected by antivirus engines as malicious at the time of the attack.
According to WHOIS entries, the domain had been registered a few days before the attack began.
Domain data from the VirusTotal resource

    At the time of the attack, content was published on the domain that copied a page of the official website of General Dynamics Mission Systems,  one of the world's largest manufacturers of military and aerospace equipment.
The Lazarus Group had already used this brand in its attacks.
The domain also had a valid SSL certificate.
Original page of the General Dynamics Mission Systems website

    At the beginning of the working week, both victims connected to the RDG server of one of the organization's branches from the compromised personal computers.
This allowed attackers to gain access to the company's corporate network.

    On the same day, the company's RDG server showed traces of illegitimate activity and evidence of malicious reconnaissance on the network for the first time.

    Later, CommsCacher with the name C:\ProgramData\USOShared\usomsqlite3.lgs.dat was also installed on the RDG server.

    The attackers also uploaded an unknown PE file with the name C:\ProgramData\volitile.dat and launched the DLL library C:\ProgramData\comms\commspkg.bin (compilation date: 2020-08-22T18:45:25Z), which executes files transfered in the configuration via the command line using CreateProcessW.
The library is protected by VMProtect.

    Two days later, after entering the corporate network, the attackers gained access to a number of servers, including the domain controller, additional RDG server, file server, and Crontab server.
On these servers, the attackers also performed reconnaissance using system utilities and system services with the name usomgmt.
The attackers used this name to name their own services on the compromised hosts:

    During incident investigation, the experts failed to gain access to files C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\gpolicy.dat, C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\gpolicy.out, C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\gpolicy.bin, and C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\gpolicy.bat.
Tampering with creation, deletion, and addition of the user admin$ to the administrator group would later provoke the suspicion of the system administrators of the compromised company and serve as the beginning of the incident response.

    Similar actions of attackers with the account admin$ were described in the report "Greetings from Lazarus."

    At the same time, by performing reconnaissance on the computers available, the attackers received new vectors for penetration into the company's corporate network.
So, two days later, after the company's network infrastructure was compromised, another employee from another branch received a job offer.
On the social network LinkedIn, the victim was contacted by a user named Rob Wilson,  shortly after which she received an email with a job offer from General Dynamics UK.
Example of correspondence with Rob Wilson on Linkedin
]com, which was not detected by antivirus engines as malicious at the time of the attack.
Domain data from the VirusTotal resource

    Note that the victim failed to open the received PDF document the first time, after which the attackers sent her the InternalPDFViewer.exe software to view PDF files.

    The compromised user also forwarded the malicious email to her colleague.
However, the recipient did not open the malicious document and did not allow the attackers to expand the attack surface.

    Sensitive information has been replaced with asterisks (*).

    On the compromised computer, the attackers performed reconnaissance using system commands query.exe, quser.exe, and netstat.exe and installed a CommsCacher backdoor named CommsCacher.dat, which gains persistence via an LNK file in the startup folder.
Command execution and network reconnaissance on the computer were carried out using the public utility SMBMAP designed for scanning SMB services.

    The phishing document GD2020090939393903.doc contains a decoy text in the form of a job offer.
The text of the document:

    Some modifications of malicious documents obtained during the investigation were protected with the password JD-20BZ@9918261231C3 (presumably, to bypass security measures).

    Analysis of the document showed that GD2020090939393903.doc contains a malicious VBA macro and a payload encoded using Base64 and XOR algorithms:
The structure of the document GD2020090939393903.doc

    Later, during threat hunting, the experts found similar documents:

    If successful, the malicious macro extracts the decrypted data to the file 963e8cfaa40226ba2e5d516464572446 in the directory C:\ProgramData\regid.mdb and runs the library with the following parameters:

    Agamemnon is a legitimate SQLite DLL library with the malicious exported function sqlite3_create_functionex.
This modification as well as the method of gaining persistence on a compromised computer in the startup folder were described in the report Operation (노스 스타) North Star A Job Offer That's Too Good to be True.

    When launched, the extracted file regid.mdb collects the following information about the system:

    Next, the malware compresses the received data using the LZ algorithm with the maximum compression ratio, after which it encrypts the data with its own algorithm and encodes it in Base64.
The malware also generates a unique identifier for the infected host.

    The collected information is sent to one of the attackers' C2 servers along with the computer ID.
The full list of C2 servers is transmitted in encrypted form via the command line.
The file GD2020090939393903.doc transmits the following list of C2 servers:

    After sending the data to the C2 server, the malware receives a response from it.
It contains the main payload also encrypted with its own algorithm.
It is either executed in the process memory or uploaded to the hard disk at: %localappdata%\~DMF[0-9]{4}.tmp (the path is given in RegExp format) and launched using rundll32.exe.
The version of payload execution is determined by the response of the C2 server.

    Note that the loader is successfully detected in the public sandbox ANY.RUN.

    CommsCacher is also a legitimate SQLite DLL library with the malicious exported function sqlite3_create_functionex.
Examples of LNK files with CommsCacher autorun parameters are shown below.

    CommsCacher downloads and uploads configuration data to the hard disk in the file: %localappdata%\.IdentityService\AccountStore.bak.
The configuration file is encrypted with the VEST encryption algorithm and contains a list of C2 servers.
Example of the configuration data:

    Connecting to one of the C2 servers, the sample receives shellcode and configuration data in response from the C2.
The received data is decrypted and the shellcode with the transmitted parameters is launched.
After that, the CommsCacher malware opens a named pipe \\.\pipe\fb4d1181bb09b484d058768598b, which is used to receive data from the shellcode and then transmit it to the C2 server.

    The detected samples C:\ProgramData\Applications\ApplicationCacher-f0182c1a4.rbs (compilation date: 2020-09-24T05:12:24Z) and C:\ProgramData\USOShared\usomsqlite3.lgs.dat (compilation date: 2020-09-29T03:34:06Z) are similar to CommsCacher.
The files contain 64 MB of random repeating characters.
They could be used by the attackers to bypass antivirus protection that can ignore large files.

    The backdoor functions and its server side were described in detail in the article Operation North Star: Behind The Scenes.

    During the incident investigation, a number of malicious C2 servers were identified, and, after studying them, the experts managed to obtain log files with the IP addresses of victims also compromised by this group.
Log format: [JD = ID][Date] [Victim IP] [User-Agent].
Example of lines from a victim log

    The attacker-controlled servers contained files named sclient+[md5 victim]+.tmp or pagefile+[md5 victim]+.dat.
These files contained information from compromised computers.

    The detected indicators of compromise belong to Lazarus Group, a hacker group also known as Hidden Cobra.
The group has been operating since 2009 at least.
Lazarus is thought to belong to a class of government-sponsored APT groups and come from North Korea.
The group regularly conducts its attacks for the purpose of cyberespionage.

    The main source vector of attacks is targeted phishing through third-party resources (Phishing: Spearphishing via Service).
In this campaign, attackers, under the guise of the HR service of General Dynamics Mission Systems,  sent documents with malicious macros containing a stub text with a job offer through LinkedIn, Telegram, WhatsApp, and corporate email.

    Below is an example of correspondence between one of the victims and an attacker in the Telegram messenger.
In this case, the attacker offered the victim to do a test assignment on the attacker-controlled server.
Example of correspondence with the attacker

    To attack the organization, the attackers created a phishing site of General Dynamics Mission Systems.
As C2 servers, they used the resources of allegedly compromised organizations located in Brazil, France, Japan, South Korea, and the United States.
Original and fake version of the GDMS website

    The group is characterized by the use of unique malicious software for remote command execution:

    The malicious campaign was also reported by researchers from IssueMakersLab:

    To identify all compromised hosts and obtain detailed information about the incident, the experts scanned the entire company's infrastructure for indicators of compromise, as well as network and file signatures of users.
All possible host artifacts were also analyzed.
The most useful artifacts for restoring the incident chronology were the USN Journal, EVTX Events, Jump Lists,  and the MFT table.

    According to the investigation, the attackers did not gain access to sensitive information.
As a result of the prompt actions of PT ESC specialists and administrators of the pharmaceutical company, the attackers were deprived of access to the controlled infrastructure.
Author: Aleksandr Grigorian, Positive Technologies
The article's author thanks the incident response and threat intelligence teams PT Expert Security Center for their help in drafting the story.

    After investigating the incident, we continued to track the Lazarus Group and identified a new attack that has no direct connection to the case in question, but affects a similar geographical segment.

    During this attack, in November 2020, attackers used a malicious document (GDLS47129481.docx 994c02f8c721254a959ed9bc823ab94b) with CVE-2017-0199.
The attack was allegedly aimed at a company from Russia.
The attack was also reported on the Anonymous Security Agency's Twitter account.

    The document contained the following stub:
Example of the phishing document

    The attackers used the domain from the previous campaign; however, the visual component of the phishing site was changed.

            LOADER [PTsecurity] Agamemnon
            sid: 10006234;10006237;10006238;

                    The Lazarus Group uses malicious job ads sent via LinkedIn

                    The Lazarus Group uses wmic.exe to run commands

                    The Lazarus Group uses CreateProcessW to run malware and WTSEnumerateSessionsW to monitor RDP sessions

                    Command and Scripting Interpreter: Windows Command Shell

                    The Lazarus Group uses the Windows command line to run commands

                    Create or Modify System Process: Windows Service

                    To gain persistence on a host, the Lazarus Group creates services using the sc.exe utility

                    The Lazarus Group creates local administrator accounts

                    Boot or Logon Autostart Execution: Shortcut Modification

                    To gain persistence on a host, the Lazarus Group places a shortcut in the startup folder

                    The configuration file AccountStore.bak is encrypted with the VEST algorithm

                    Hide Artifacts: Hidden Files and Directories

                    The Lazarus Group stores its malware in hidden folders at C:\ProgramData

                    Indicator Removal on Host: File Deletion

                    The Lazarus Group removes malware samples from the file system

                    Signed Binary Proxy Execution: Rundll32

                    A malicious DLL is launched via rundll32.exe with an indication of the exported function and with startup parameters

                    The Lazarus Group collects information about users using the net user and net group commands

                    Permission Groups Discovery: Domain Groups

                    The Lazarus Group uses the adfind utility to retrieve information from Active Directory

                    The Lazarus Group collects information about the network settings of the infected computer

                    The Lazarus Group uses the SMBMap utility to discover shared folders within the network

                    The Lazarus Group uses the reg.exe utility to get information from the registry

                    The Lazarus Group collects information about users of a compromised computer

                    The Lazarus Group uses the tasklist.exe utility to get information about processes

                    The Lazarus Group uses the systeminfo.exe utility to get information about the system

                    Remote Services: SMB/Windows Admin Shares

                    The Lazarus Group uses compromised legitimate privileged accounts to move laterally on the network

                    The Lazarus Group uses its own data encryption algorithm to communicate with the C2

                    Application Layer Protocol: Web Protocols

                    The Lazarus Group's malware uses the standard HTTP protocol to connect to the C2
