An official website of the United States government Here's how you know
This Alert uses the MITRE Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge (ATT&CK®) framework.
See the ATT&CK for Enterprise framework for all referenced threat actor techniques.
This joint advisory is the result of analytic efforts among the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), the Department of the Treasury (Treasury), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and U.S. Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM).
CISA, Treasury, FBI, and USCYBERCOM highlight the cyber threat posed by North Korea—formally known as the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK)—and provide recommended steps to mitigate the threat.
Refer to the following Malware Analysis Reports for associated IOCs: CROWDEDFLOUNDER, ECCENTRICBANDWAGON, ELECTRICFISH, FASTCash for Windows, HOPLIGHT, and VIVACIOUSGIFT.
Click here for a PDF version of this report.
North Korea's intelligence apparatus controls a hacking team dedicated to robbing banks through remote internet access.
To differentiate methods from other North Korean malicious cyber activity, the U.S. Government refers to this team as BeagleBoyz, who represent a subset of HIDDEN COBRA activity.
This illicit behavior has been identified by the United Nations (UN) DPRK Panel of Experts as evasion of UN Security Council resolutions, as it generates substantial revenue for North Korea.
North Korea can use these funds for its UN-prohibited nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programs.
Additionally, this activity poses significant operational risk to the Financial Services sector and erodes the integrity of the financial system.
The BeagleBoyz’s bank robberies pose severe operational risk for individual firms beyond reputational harm and financial loss from theft and recovery costs.
The BeagleBoyz have attempted to steal nearly $2 billion since at least 2015, according to public estimates.
Equally concerning, these malicious actors have manipulated and, at times, rendered inoperable, critical computer systems at banks and other financial institutions.
North Korea’s widespread international bank robbery scheme that exploits critical banking systems may erode confidence in those systems and presents risks to financial institutions across the world.
Any BeagleBoyz robbery directed at one bank implicates many other financial services firms in both the theft and the flow of illicit funds back to North Korea.
BeagleBoyz activity fits a known North Korean pattern of abusing the international financial system for profit.
North Korea’s BeagleBoyz are responsible for the sophisticated cyber-enabled ATM cash-out campaigns identified publicly as “FASTCash” in October 2018.
Since 2016, the BeagleBoyz have perpetrated the FASTCash scheme, targeting banks’ retail payment system infrastructure (i.e., switch application servers processing International Standards Organization [ISO] 8583 messages, which is the standard for financial transaction messaging).
For more information about FASTCash, please see https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/TA18-275A.
The BeagleBoyz, an element of the North Korean government’s Reconnaissance General Bureau, have likely been active since at least 2014.
As opposed to typical cybercrime, the group likely conducts well-planned, disciplined, and methodical cyber operations more akin to careful espionage activities.
Their malicious cyber operations have netted hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars and are likely a major source of funding for the North Korean regime.
The group has always used a calculated approach, which allows them to sharpen their tactics, techniques, and procedures while evading detection.
Over time, their operations have become increasingly complex and destructive.
The tools and implants employed by this group are consistently complex and demonstrate a strong focus on effectiveness and operational security.
The BeagleBoyz overlap to varying degrees with groups tracked by the cybersecurity industry as: APT38 (FireEye), Bluenoroff (Kaspersky), Lazarus Group (ESTSecurity), and Stardust Chollima (CrowdStrike).
Figure 1: Nations probably targeted by BeagleBoyz since 2015
Figure 2 provides a graphical depiction of a BeagleBoyz bank heist.
The next section describes in detail the end-to-end actions the BeagleBoyz take to rob financial institutions with a malicious cyber operation.
Figure 2: BeagleBoyz Bank Heist overview
The BeagleBoyz use a variety of tools and techniques to gain access to a financial institution’s network, learn the topology to discover key systems, and monetize their access.
The technical analysis below represents an amalgamation of multiple known incidents, rather than details of a single operation.
These findings are presented to highlight the group’s ability to tailor their techniques to different targets and to adapt their methods over time.
Consequently, there is a need for layered mitigations to effectively defend against this activity, as relying solely on network signature detection will not sufficiently protect against North Korea’s BeagleBoyz.
The BeagleBoyz have used a variety of techniques, such as spearphishing and watering holes, to enable initial access into targeted financial institutions.
Towards the end of 2018 through 2019 and in early 2020, the BeagleBoyz demonstrated the use of social engineering tactics by carrying out job-application themed phishing attacks using the following publicly available malicious files.
The BeagleBoyz may also be working with or contracting out to criminal hacking groups, like TA505, for initial access development.
The third party typically uses commodity malware to establish initial access on a victim’s network and then turns over the access to the BeagleBoyz for follow-on exploitation, which may not occur until months later.
The BeagleBoyz have also used the following techniques to gain an initial foothold on a targeted computer network (Initial Access [TA0001]).
The BeagleBoyz selectively exploit victim computer systems after initially compromising a computer connected to a financial institution’s corporate network.
After gaining initial access to a financial institution’s corporate network, the BeagleBoyz are selective in which victim systems they further exploit.
The BeagleBoyz use a variety of techniques to run their code on local and remote victim systems [Execution [TA0002]).
The BeagleBoyz use many techniques to maintain access on compromised networks through system restarts, changed credentials, and other interruptions that could affect their access (Persistence [TA0003]).
The BeagleBoyz often seek access to financial institutions’ systems that have tiered user and system accounts with customized privileges.
The BeagleBoyz must overcome these restrictions to access necessary systems, monitor normal user behavior, and install and execute additional malicious tools.
To do so, the BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to gain higher-level permissions on a system or network (Privilege Escalation [TA0004]).
Throughout their exploitation of a financial institution’s computer network, the BeagleBoyz have used different techniques to avoid detection by OS security features, system and network security software, and system audits (Defense Evasion [TA0005]).
The BeagleBoyz may use malware like ECCENTRICBANDWAGON to log key strokes and take screen captures.
The U.S. Government has identified some ECCENTRICBANDWAGON samples that have the ability to RC4 encrypt logged data, but the tool has no network functionality.
The implant uses specific formatting for logged data and saves the file locally; another tool obtains the logged data.
The implant also contains no mechanism for persistence or self-loading and expects a specific configuration file to be present on the system.
A full technical report for ECCENTRICBANDWAGON is available at https://us-cert.cisa.gov/northkorea.
The BeagleBoyz may not always need to use custom keyloggers like ECCENTRICBANDWAGON or other tools to obtain credentials from a compromised system.
Depending on the victim’s environment, the BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to steal credentials (Credential Access [TA0006]).
Once inside a financial institution’s network, the BeagleBoyz appear to seek two specific systems—the SWIFT terminal and the server hosting the institution’s payment switch application.
As they progress through a network, they learn about the systems they have accessed in order to map the network and gain access to the two goal systems.
To do so, the BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to gain knowledge about the systems and internal network (Discovery [TA0007]).
Specifically, the BeagleBoyz have been known to create firewall exemptions on specific ports, including ports 443, 6443, 8443, and 9443.
Depending on the configuration of compromised systems and the security environment of the victim’s computer network, the BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to enter and control remote systems on a compromised network (Lateral Movement [TA0008]).
Depending on various environmental attributes the BeagleBoyz encounter during their exploitation, they may deploy a variety of reconnaissance tools or use commonly available administrative tools for malicious purposes.
For example, the BeagleBoyz often use publicly available code from PowerShell Empire for malicious purposes.
The BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to gather information from exploited systems (Collection [TA0009]).
The BeagleBoyz likely change tools—such as CROWDEDFLOUNDER and HOPLIGHT—over time to maintain remote access to financial institution networks and to interact with those systems.
Analysis of the following CROWDEDFLOUNDER samples was first released in October 2018 as part of the FASTCash campaign.
MD5 hash: 5cfa1c2cb430bec721063e3e2d144feb
MD5 hash: 4f67f3e4a7509af1b2b1c6180a03b3e4
The BeagleBoyz have used CROWDEDFLOUNDER as a remote access trojan (RAT) since at least 2018.
The implant is designed to operate on Microsoft Windows hosts and can upload and download files, launch a remote command shell, inject into victim processes, obtain user and host information, and securely delete files.
The implant may be packed with Themida to degrade or prevent effective reverse engineering or evade detection on a Windows host.
It can be set to act in beacon or listening modes, depending on command line arguments or configuration specifications.
The implant obfuscates network communications using a simple encoding algorithm.
The listening mode of CROWDEDFLOUNDER facilitates proxies like ELECTRICFISH (discussed below) with tunneling traffic in a victim’s network.
More recently, the U.S. Government has found HOPLIGHT malware on victim systems, suggesting the BeagleBoyz are using HOPLIGHT for similar purposes.
HOPLIGHT has the same basic RAT functionality as the CROWDEDFLOUNDER implant.
In addition, HOPLIGHT has the capability to create fraudulent Transport Layer Security (TLS) sessions to obfuscate command and control (C2) connections, making detection and tracking of the malware’s communications difficult.
Full technical reports for CROWDEDFLOUNDER and HOPLIGHT are available at https://us-cert.cisa.gov/northkorea.
The BeagleBoyz use network proxy tunneling tools—including VIVACIOUSGIFT and ELECTRICFISH—to tunnel communications from non-internet facing systems like an ATM switch application server or a SWIFT terminal to internet-facing systems.
The BeagleBoyz use these network proxy tunneling tools, likely placed at or near a victim’s network boundary, to tunnel other protocols such as RDP and Secure Shell or other implant traffic out from the internal network.
It appears that as the BeagleBoyz change proxy tools, there is some overlap between their use of older and newer malware.
For example, the BeagleBoyz appear to have begun using ELECTRICFISH as they wound down use of VIVACIOUSGIFT.
There has been a noticeable decline in ELECTRICFISH use following the U.S. Government’s disclosure of it in May 2019.
Full technical reports for VIVACIOUSGIFT and ELECTRICFISH are available at https://us-cert.cisa.gov/northkorea.
In addition to these tools, the BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to communicate with financial institution victim systems under their control (Command and Control [TA0011]).
In addition to robbing traditional financial institutions, the BeagleBoyz target cryptocurrency exchanges to steal large amounts of cryptocurrency, sometimes valued at hundreds of millions of dollars per incident.
Cryptocurrency offers the BeagleBoyz an irreversible method of theft that can be converted into fiat currency because the permanent nature of cryptocurrency transfers do not allow for claw-back mechanisms.
Working with U.S. Government partners, CISA, Treasury, FBI, and USCYBERCOM identified COPPERHEDGE as the tool of choice for the BeagleBoyz to exploit cryptocurrency exchanges.
COPPERHEDGE is a full-featured remote access tool capable of running arbitrary commands, performing system reconnaissance, and exfiltrating data.
Full technical analysis of COPPERHEDGE is available at https://us-cert.cisa.gov/northkorea.
During a cyber operation, the BeagleBoyz need to exfiltrate a variety of data from compromised systems.
In addition to the C2 tools noted that have built-in exfiltration features, such as CROWDEDFLOUNDER and HOPLIGHT, the BeagleBoyz use the following techniques to steal data from a network (Exfiltration [TA0010]).
The U.S. Government has observed the BeagleBoyz successfully monetize illicit access to financial institutions’ SWIFT terminals to enable wire fraud and gain access to the institutions’ payment switch application servers, which allowed fraudulent ATM cash outs.
After gaining access to either one or both of these operationally critical systems, the BeagleBoyz monitor the systems to learn about their configurations and legitimate use patterns, and then they deploy bespoke tools to facilitate illicit monetization.
The cybersecurity community and Financial Services sector have released substantial information on the BeagleBoyz manipulation of compromised SWIFT terminals, describing their ability to monitor these systems, send fraudulent messages, and attempt to hide the fraudulent activity from detection.
The discussion below focuses on the custom tools used to manipulate payment switch applications for ATM cash outs.
The BeagleBoyz use FASTCash malware to intercept financial request messages and reply with fraudulent but legitimate-looking affirmative response messages in the ISO 8583 format.
The BeagleBoyz have functionally equivalent FASTCash malware for both UNIX and Windows that they deploy depending on the operating system running on the server hosting the bank’s payment switch application.
FASTCash for UNIX is composed of AIX executable files designed to inject code and libraries into a currently running process.
One AIX executable provides export functions, which allows an application to manipulate transactions on financial systems using the ISO 8583 international standard for financial transaction card-originated interchange messaging.
The injected executables interpret financial request messages and construct fraudulent financial response messages.
For more details on FASTCash for UNIX malware, please see the FASTCash report at https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/TA18-275A.
The BeagleBoyz use FASTCash for Windows to manipulate transactions processed by a switch application running on a Windows box.
FASTCash for Windows is also specific to the ISO 8583 message format.
The BeagleBoyz appear to have modified publicly available source code to write parts of the tool, likely to speed development.
The malware contains code probably taken from open-source repositories on the internet to create hashmaps and hook functions and to parse ISO 8583 messages.
FASTCash for Windows injects itself into software running on a Windows platform.
The malware then takes control of the software’s network send and receive functions, allowing it to manipulate ISO 8583 messages.
The U.S. Government has identified two variants of FASTCash for Windows.
One variant supports ASCII encoding.
The BeagleBoyz appear to have modified the second variant’s message parsing code to support Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCIDC) encoding.
Both ASCII and EBCDIC are character encoding formats.
FASTCash for Windows malware uses code from github.com/petewarden/c_hashmap for hashmaps, code from Microsoft's Detours Library at github.com/Microsoft/Detours for hooking, and code from to parse ISO 8583 messages.
The malware hooks onto the send and receive function of the switch application so that it can process inbound request messages as they are received.
FASTCash for Windows inspects the inbound message, probably looking for specific account numbers.
If the account number matches an expected number, the malware constructs a fraudulent response message.
If the account number does not match an expected number, the malware allows the request to pass through normally.
If the malware constructs a fraudulent response message, it then sends it back to the acquirer without any further processing by the switch application, leaving the issuer without any awareness of the fraudulent transaction.
Full technical reports for FASTCash and FASTCash for Windows malware are available at https://us-cert.cisa.gov/northkorea.
The BeagleBoyz have used the following techniques to manipulate business and operational processes for monetary or destructive purposes (Impact [TA0040]).
Require chip and personal identification number (PIN) cryptogram validation.
Logically segregate your operating environment.
Monitor for anomalous behavior as part of layered security.
Validate issuer responses to financial request messages.
Users and administrators should use the following best practices to strengthen the security posture of their organization’s systems:
Additional information on malware incident prevention and handling can be found in National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-83, Guide to Malware Incident Prevention and Handling for Desktops and Laptops.
Recipients of this report are encouraged to contribute any additional information that they may have related to this threat.
For any questions related to this report or to report an intrusion and request resources for incident response or technical assistance, please contact:
This product is provided subject to this Notification and this Privacy & Use policy.
We recently updated our anonymous product survey; we'd welcome your feedback.
Receive security alerts, tips, and other updates.
CISA is part of the Department of Homeland Security
