A week into Sony Pictures’ devastating hack attack, a series of leaked internal documents and spreadsheets containing information and data of the company’s employees and senior executives have been leaked to the public.
Based on initial reports, Sony shut down their entire corporate network after a threatening message, along with a skull graphic, appeared on their computer screens.
The message, sent by a hacker group who call themselves "Guardians of Peace" (#GOP), warned that it was "only the beginning," and that they will continue until their "request be met".
Shortly after the news broke out about the Sony hack, there were rampant claims of the involvement of North Korea who used a certain “wiper” malware.
[More: How did the hackers drop the "warning" wallpaper into Sony's office computers?
Read An Analysis of the “Destructive” Malware Behind FBI Warnings from the Security Intelligence Blog]
Like most breach stories, we learn more about the nature of the hack as time passes, and though the ongoing investigation provided us with a few solid details, most of the headlines around the hack have focused more on who did it rather than what was obtained.
Meanwhile, researchers have determined the destructive malware that launched the attack.
From a security standpoint, it's critical to record all aspects of the incident and respond urgently and accordingly.
In light of the attack, we’ve rounded up important dates and events to provide an overview of what happened, what was stolen, and who the people are behind the hack.
The Malware Used in the Attacks
The recent attack reminds IT administrators to learn from such incidents and think ahead in terms of securing their network infrastructure.
Organizations should look into the developments of the Sony attack, and learn from it to be able to defend their own networks accordingly.
[More from the Security Intelligence Blog: A look into the malware variants that could be linked to the incident, including one that disables the antivirus application]
Individuals should also be vigilant; as investigative reports of controversial attacks continue to flood the news, bad guys could use this as a social engineering lure to trick users into clicking on suspicious links in spam mails and social media posts.
As such, we advise users to be careful regarding the links they click and the stories they follow online, as cybercriminals are quick to play on people’s curiosity especially when it comes to major news breakouts.
Add this infographic to your site:1.
Click on the box below.
Press Ctrl+A to select all.
Paste the code into your page (Ctrl+V).
Image will appear the same size as you see above.
In the first half of this year, cybersecurity strongholds were surrounded by cybercriminals waiting to pounce at the sight of even the slightest crack in defenses to ravage valuable assets.View the report
The upheavals of 2020 challenged the limits of organizations and users, and provided openings for malicious actors.
A robust cybersecurity posture can help equip enterprises and individuals amid a continuously changing threat landscape.View the 2020 Annual Cybersecurity Report
