Google TAG warns security researchers to be on the lookout when approached by unknown individuals on social media.
Group of hooded hackers shining through a digital north korean flag cybersecurity concept
Google said today that a North Korean government hacking group has targeted members of the cyber-security community engaging in vulnerability research.
Not everyone needs a MacBook or a Windows 10 laptop.
These Chromebook laptops feature low prices and long battery lives.
The attacks have been spotted by the Google Threat Analysis Group (TAG), a Google security team specialized in hunting advanced persistent threat (APT) groups.
In a report published earlier today, Google said North Korean hackers used multiple profiles on various social networks, such as Twitter, LinkedIn, Telegram, Discord, and Keybase, to reach out to security researchers using fake personas.
Email was also used in some instances, Google said.
"After establishing initial communications, the actors would ask the targeted researcher if they wanted to collaborate on vulnerability research together, and then provide the researcher with a Visual Studio Project," said Adam Weidemann, a security researcher with Google TAG.
The Visual Studio project contained malicious code that installed malware on the targeted researcher's operating system.
The malware acted as a backdoor, contacting a remote command and control server and waiting for commands.
This malware was later linked to the Lazarus Group, a well-known North Korean state-sponsored operation.
KTAE code similarity analysis for the malware used to target security researchers involved in 0day analysis and development.
"Manuscrypt" (also known as FALLCHILL) is typically used by the Lazarus APT.
But Wiedemann said that the attackers didn't always distribute malicious files to their targets.
In some other cases, they asked security researchers to visit a blog they had hosted at blog[.]br0vvnn[.
Google said the blog hosted malicious code that infected the security researcher's computer after accessing the site.
"A malicious service was installed on the researcher's system and an in-memory backdoor would begin beaconing to an actor-owned command and control server," Weidemann said.
But Google TAG also added that many victims who accessed the site were also running "fully patched and up-to-date Windows 10 and Chrome browser versions" and still got infected.
Details about the browser-based attacks are still scant, but some security researchers believe the North Korean group most likely used a combination of Chrome and Windows 10 zero-day vulnerabilities to deploy their malicious code.
As a result, the Google TAG team is currently asking the cyber-security community to share more details about the attacks, if any security researchers believe they were infected.
The Google TAG report includes a list of links for the fake social media profiles that the North Korean actor used to lure and trick members of the infosec community.
Security researchers are advised to review their browsing histories and see if they interacted with any of these profiles or if they accessed the malicious blog.br0vvnn.io domain.
In case they did, they are most likely to have been infected, and certain steps need to be taken to investigate their own systems.
The reason for targeting security researchers is pretty obvious as it could allow the North Korean group to steal exploits for vulnerabilities discovered by the infected researchers, vulnerabilities that the threat group could deploy in its own attacks with little to no development costs.
In the meantime, several security researchers have already disclosed on social media that they received messages from the attackers' accounts, although, none have admitted to having systems compromised.
I can confirm this is true and I got hit by @z0x55g who sent me a Windows kernel PoC trigger.
The vulnerability was real and complex to trigger.
Fortunately I only ran it in VM.. in the end the VMDK I was using was actually corrupted and non-bootable, so it self-imploded https://t.co/dvdCWsZyne
One of the above Twitter accounts also talked to me...Fortunately, I have nothing to lose... https://t.co/flb1NJuaC8
At least two of mentioned accounts contacted me via DM.
Always happy to help if I can, but their attempt was too shady to interact: https://t.co/yqJNc6CGML pic.twitter.com/3NCh912lWu
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.

Additional fixes released addressing Apache HTTP Server issue

									
																			CISA said the vulnerabilities have been exploited in the wild.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
