This blog was written with support and contributions provided by Asheer Maholtra, Jessica Saavedra Morales, and Thomas Roccia.
McAfee Advanced Threat Research (ATR) analysts have discovered an aggressive Bitcoin-stealing phishing campaign by the international cybercrime group Lazarus that uses sophisticated malware with long-term impact.
This new campaign, dubbed HaoBao, resumes Lazarus’ previous phishing emails, posed as employee recruitment, but now targets Bitcoin users and global financial organizations.
When victims open malicious documents attached to the emails, the malware scans for Bitcoin activity and then establishes an implant for long-term data-gathering.
HaoBao targets and never-before-seen implants signal to McAfee ATR an ambitious campaign by Lazarus to establish cryptocurrency cybercrime at a sophisticated level.
Beginning in 2017, the Lazarus group heavily targeted individuals with spear phishing emails impersonating job recruiters which contained malicious documents.
The campaign lasted from April to October and used job descriptions relevant to target organizations, in both English and Korean language.
The objective was to gain access to the target’s environment and obtain key military program insight or steal money.
The 2017 campaign targets ranged from defense contractors to financial institutions, including crypto currency exchanges, however; much of this fake job recruitment activity ceased months later, with the last activity observed October 22, 2017.
On January 15th , McAfee ATR discovered a malicious document masquerading as a job recruitment for a Business Development Executive located in Hong Kong for a large multi-national bank.
The document was distributed via a Dropbox account at the following URL:
This is the mark of a new campaign, though it utilizes techniques, tactics and procedures observed in 2017.
This document had the last author ‘Windows User’ and was created January 16, 2018 with Korean language resources.
Several additional malicious documents with the same author appeared between January 16 though January 24, 2018.

Victims are persuaded to enable content through a notification claiming the document was created in an earlier version of Microsoft Word.
The malicious documents then launch an implant on the victim’s system via a Visual Basic macro.
The document (7e70793c1ca82006775a0cac2bd75cc9ada37d7c) created January 24, 2018 drops and executes an implant compiled January 22, 2018 with the name lsm.exe (535f212b320df049ae8b8ebe0a4f93e3bd25ed79).
The implant lsm.exe contacted 210.122.7.129 which also resolves to worker.co.kr.Implants dropped in campaign
The other malicious document ( a79488b114f57bd3d8a7fa29e7647e2281ce21f6) created January 19, 2018 drops the implant (afb2595ce1ecf0fdb9631752e32f0e32be3d51bb); which is 99% similar-to the lsm.exe implant.
This document was distributed from the following Dropbox URLs:
This implant (csrss.exe) compiled January 15, 2018 contacts an IP address 70.42.52.80 which resolves to deltaemis.com.
We identified that this domain was used to host a malicious document from a previous 2017 campaign targeting the Sikorsky program.
A third malicious document (dc06b737ce6ada23b4d179d81dc7d910a7dbfdde) created January 19, 2018 drops e8faa68daf62fbe2e10b3bac775cce5a3bb2999e which is compiled January 15, 2018.
This implant communicates to a South Korean IP address 221.164.168.185 which resolves to palgong-cc.co.kr.
McAfee ATR analysis finds the dropped implants have never been seen before in the wild and have not been used in previous Lazarus campaigns from 2017.
Furthermore, this campaign deploys a one-time data gathering implant that relies upon downloading a second stage to gain persistence.
The implants contain a hardcoded word “haobao” that is used as a switch when executing from the Visual Basic macro.
The malicious document contains two payloads as encrypted string arrays embedded in Visual Basic macro code.
The payloads are present as encrypted string arrays that are decrypted in memory, written to disk and launched in sequence (second stage malicious binary launched first and then the decoy document).
The VBA Macro code is self-executing and configured to execute when the OLE document (MS Word doc) is opened (via “Sub AutoOpen()”).
The AutoOpen() function in the VBA Macro performs the following tasks in the sequence listed:
cmdline for executing the second stage binary:
cmd.exe /c start /b <temp_dir_path>\.\lsm.exe /haobao
Link file command line: <temp_dir_path>\.\lsm.exe /haobao
As part of the implant initialization activities the implant does the following;
If the malware does not find this string in its cmdline arguments, it simply quits without going any further.
During our research, we discovered additional variants of the DLL file.
All the malicious activities described below are performed by the DLL unless specified otherwise.
The implant has the capability of gathering data from the victim’s system.
The following information will be gathered and sent to the command and control server.
This key is checked again as part of the command and control communication and is sent as a duplicate value to the command and control in the HTTP POST request as well (explained in the below).
In preparation of the exfiltration of information collected from the endpoint, the malware performs the following activities:
Once the malware has performed all these activities it sends an HTTP POST request to the CnC server:
idx= 20 (14h) if the Registry key does not exist; 24 (18h) if the key exists.
no= XORed + base64 encoded “<Computername> \ <username>”
mode= XORed + base64 encoded Process listing + Registry key flag
The persistence mechanism of the malware is performed only for the downloaded implant.
Persistence is established for the implant via the visual basic macro code initially executed upon document loading by the victim.
This persistence is also performed ONLY if the malware successfully executes the downloaded implant.
The malware first tries to update the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE registry key.
If the update is unsuccessful then it also tries to update the HKEY_CURRENT_USER registry key.
Value written to registry to achieve persistence on the endpoint:
Value Content = “C:\DOCUME~1\<username>\LOCALS~1\Temp\OneDrive.exe” kLZXlyJelgqUpKzP
The techniques, tactics and procedures are very similar to the campaigns that targeted US Defense contractors, US Energy sector, financial organizations and crypto currency exchanges in 2017.
The same Windows User author appeared back in 2017 in two malicious documents 비트코인_지갑주소_및_거래번호.doc and 비트코인 거래내역.xls which were involved in crypto currency targeting.
Furthermore, one of the implants communicates to an IP address that was involved in hosting malicious job description documents in 2017 involving the Sikorsky military program.
McAfee Advanced Threat research determines with confidence that Lazarus is the threat group behind this attack for the following reasons:
In this latest discovery by McAfee ATR, despite a short pause in similar operations, the Lazarus group targets crypto currency and financial organizations.
Furthermore, we have observed an increased usage of limited data gathering modules to quickly identify targets for further attacks.
This campaign is tailored to identifying those who are running Bitcoin related software through specific system scans.
Ryan Sherstobitoff is a Senior Analyst for Major Campaigns – Advanced Threat Research in McAfee.
Ryan specializes in threat intelligence in the Asia Pacific Region where he conducts cutting edge research into new adversarial techniques and adapts those to better monitor the threat landscape.
He formerly was the Chief Corporate Evangelist at Panda Security, where ...
Categories: McAfee LabsTags: cybersecurity, financial services, Bitcoin, Lazarus, Advanced Threat Research
