Exclusive: FBI alerts US private sectors about attacks aimed at their supply chain software providers.


                        Cyberwar and the Future of Cybersecurity
Today's security threats have expanded in scope and seriousness.
There can now be millions -- or even billions -- of dollars at risk when information security isn't handled properly.
The FBI has sent a security alert to the US private sector about an ongoing hacking campaign that's targeting supply chain software providers, ZDNet has learned.
The FBI says hackers are attempting to infect companies with the Kwampirs malware, a remote access trojan (RAT).
Besides attacks against supply chain software providers, the FBI said the same malware was also deployed in attacks against companies in the healthcare, energy, and financial sectors.
The alert did not identify the targeted software providers, nor any other victims.
Instead, the FBI shared IOCs (indicators of compromise) and YARA rules so organizations can scan internal networks for signs of the Kwampirs RAT used in the recent attacks.
The Kwampirs malware was first described in a report published by US cyber-security firm Symantec in April 2018.
At the time, Symantec said a group codenamed Orangeworm had used the Kwampirs malware to similarly target supply chain companies that provided software for the healthcare sector.
Symantec said Orangeworm had been in operation since 2015 and was focused on the healthcare industry primarily.
"Orangeworm's secondary targets include Manufacturing, Information Technology, Agriculture, and Logistics," Symantec said at the time.
A Lab52 report released a year later, in April 2019, confirmed the Symantec findings and the group's focus on the healthcare industry.
However, the FBI alert sent out last week specifically warns that attacks employing Kwampirs have now evolved to targeting companies in the ICS (Industrial Control Systems) sector, and especially the energy sector.
In 2018 and 2019, neither Symantec nor Lab52 made any attribution on the group's country of origin.
The FBI, however, claims that new evidence from code analysis suggests that Kwampirs contains "numerous similarities" with Shamoon, an infamous data-wiping malware developed by APT33, an Iranian-linked hacking group.
"While the Kwampirs RAT has not been observed incorporating a wiper component, comparative forensic analysis has revealed the Kwampirs RAT as having numerous similarities with the data destruction malware Disttrack (commonly known as Shamoon)," the FBI said.
The Shamoon malware has been used in multiple data-wiping attacks against companies in the energy sector, and more specifically, in the oil & gas fields [1, 2, 3].
The FBI urged companies to scan networks for any signs of Kwampirs and report any infections.
#Kwampirs has similarities of #Disttrack/#Shamoon from #APT33?Here's some yara rules for #Kwampirshttps://t.co/fZUwytSpNT pic.twitter.com/AB1yns8ov2
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
