Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The Ryuk Ransomware uses the Wake-on-Lan feature to turn on powered off devices on a compromised network to have greater success encrypting them.
Wake-on-Lan is a hardware feature that allows a powered down device to be woken up, or powered on, by sending a special network packet to it.
This is useful for administrators who may need to push out updates to a computer or perform scheduled tasks when it is powered down.
According to a recent analysis of the Ryuk Ransomware by Head of SentinelLabs Vitali Kremez, when the malware is executed it will spawn subprocesses with the argument '8 LAN'.
When this argument is used, Ryuk will scan the device's ARP table, which is a list of known IP addresses on the network and their associated mac addresses, and check if the entries are part of the private IP address subnets of "10.
If the ARP entry is part of any of those networks, Ryuk will send a Wake-on-Lan (WoL) packet to the device's MAC address to have it power up.
This WoL request comes in the form of a 'magic packet' containing 'FF FF FF FF FF FF FF FF'.
If the WoL request was successful, Ryuk will then attempt to mount the remote device's C$ administrative share.
If they can mount the share, Ryuk will encrypt that remote computer's drive as well.
In conversations with BleepingComputer, Kremez stated that this evolution in Ryuk's tactics allow a better reach in a compromised network from a single device and shows the Ryuk operator's skill traversing a corporate network.
"This is how the group adapted the network-wide ransomware model to affect more machines via the single infection and by reaching the machines via WOL & ARP," Kremez told BleepingComputer.
"It allows for more reach and less isolation and demonstrates their experience dealing with large corporate environments."
To mitigate this new feature, administrators should only allow Wake-on-Lan packets from administrative devices and workstations.
This would allow administrators to still benefit from this feature while adding some security to the endpoints.
At the same time, this does not help if an administrative workstation is compromised, which happens quite often in targeted ransomware attacks.
Update 1/14/20 11:28 AM: CrowdStrike also has analysis of this feature here.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Terrifying how much criminal energy goes into the development of RYUK ransomware.
Hello, i've found SEVERAL WAYS to recover Ryuk encrypted files.
I would be glad if anyone could give me some sample because it could be useful in finding a way to calculate the key instead of just recovering files.
This ransomware is so advanced (in terms of his code and process) that they forgot about some SIMPLE WINDOWS'S ENVIROMENTS things that are helpful in recovering files.
Other than using external backup copies of files encrypted on the computer....what other way have you found for "recovering" encrypted files other than decryting?
Inquiring minds want to know.
Just to tell you something, working on file history could let you recover everything on a company network.
Every workstation can help you decrypt another workstation, but I can't give you details for now.
Talking about any other method, would result on helping the hacker team behind ryuk and that's why I want to use my samples (and some more, If can get some) to calculate the key (it's not that difficult understanding how if you analyze the infection through a network sniffer on a sandbox)
Sodinokibi (post August 2019 version) successfully decrypted thanks to a Facebook group who submitted samples.
Ryuk's taking a bit more time but it's "vulnerable to the same method", could someone send samples?
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
