Today, officials from the FBI and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security hastily assembled a conference call with healthcare industry executives warning about an “imminent cybercrime threat to U.S. hospitals and healthcare providers.”
The agencies on the conference call, which included the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), warned participants about “credible information of an increased and imminent cybercrime threat to US hospitals and healthcare providers.”
The agencies said they were sharing the information “to provide warning to healthcare providers to ensure that they take timely and reasonable precautions to protect their networks from these threats.”
The warning came less than two days after this author received a tip from Alex Holden, founder of Milwaukee-based cyber intelligence firm Hold Security.
Holden said he saw online communications this week between cybercriminals affiliated with a Russian-speaking ransomware group known as Ryuk in which group members discussed plans to deploy ransomware at more than 400 healthcare facilities in the U.S.
One participant on the government conference call today said the agencies offered few concrete details of how healthcare organizations might better protect themselves against this threat actor or purported malware campaign.
“They didn’t share any IoCs [indicators of compromise], so it’s just been ‘patch your systems and report anything suspicious’,” said a healthcare industry veteran who sat in on the discussion.
However, others on the call said IoCs may be of little help for hospitals that have already been infiltrated by Ryuk.
Nevertheless, cybersecurity incident response firm Mandiant today released a list of domains and Internet addresses used by Ryuk in previous attacks throughout 2020 and up to the present day.
Mandiant refers to the group by the threat actor classification “UNC1878,” and aired a webcast today detailing some of Ryuk’s latest exploitation tactics.
Charles Carmakal, senior vice president for Mandiant, told Reuters that UNC1878 is one of most brazen, heartless, and disruptive threat actors he’s observed over the course of his career.
“Multiple hospitals have already been significantly impacted by Ryuk ransomware and their networks have been taken offline,” Carmakal said.
So far, however, nothing like hundreds of facilities have publicly reported ransomware incidents.
But there have been a handful of hospitals dealing with ransomware attacks in the past few days.
–Becker’s Hospital Review reported today that a ransomware attack hit Klamath Falls, Ore.-based Sky Lakes Medical Center’s computer systems.
–WWNY’s Channel 7 News in New York reported yesterday that a Ryuk ransomware attack on St. Lawrence Health System led to computer infections at Caton-Potsdam, Messena and Gouverneur hospitals.
–NBC5 reports The University of Vermont Health Network is dealing with a “significant and ongoing system-wide network issue” that could be a malicious cyber attack.
-A story at BleepingComputer.com says Wyckoff Hospital in New York suffered a Ryuk ransomware attack on Oct. 28.
This is a developing story.
Stay tuned for further updates.
ET: The FBI, DHS and HHS just jointly issued an alert about this, available here.
Update, Oct. 30, 11:14 a.m.
ET: Added mention of Wyckoff hospital Ryuk compromise.

         This entry was posted on Wednesday 28th of October 2020 08:43 PM
WHO Give s about all of this???
People have no food no Job no money!
But you have Internet and time to type a comment?
The poor need functioning hospitals too, and likely more so.
When your medical record is exfiltrated and posted to the public because the hospital did not pay the ransom, you might care.
My daughter works in the office at a local private hospital and they have been unable to access the computers since last Monday and are now sitting at home (without pay) waiting until the system can be restored.
Which hospital system is this, what state?
Add all what you mentioned, all while losing control of your identity and medical records of you and your children.
Trust me, you would care.
2 months and counting and it sucks.
If you don’t like this forum then feel free to leave it.
Hospitals, like any other public-facing large orgs have so many ways a single staffer can get phished and be the entry point into their system.
All the trainings in the world cannot idiot proof very one of these vulnerabilities.
Funny thing is the USA instutions invests in bitcoins lol
So its funny I guess its a loundry of ransome paymemts.
Feel fre to visit myy web page: mousse à raser
I just need my inaccessible MRI so I can move, literally, forward, maintain some mobility.
Ridgeview has offered no solutions.
I went through one just prior to this attack.
And have many other issues.
They don’t seem a bit concerned about patients.
Quality of life is minimal.
This makes it easier to give up.
Multiple health issues that are progressive and incurable.
And no one checks, by phone at least to make sure we are holding up.
And sadly consequences happen that are tragic.
This is bigger than what’s mentioned or I missed the part about possible lives lost.
Van you live with this.
And it confirms my decision to call it.
It’s eventually going to take me.
And so frightening when I’m a progressive situation.
And I’m just 1 person.
Gotta be lots of consequences from this.
Yet we are I found out.
And I’m done, I’m
 bowing out.
I’ll manage my own care as usual.
It’s much like this care.
Non existent but at least I’m calling the shots.
No more awful pointless procedures etc.
I’m backlogged as is and this makes surrendering easy.
Accountability falls on you to prevent backlash.
Outcomes that are tragic, potentially.
Offering realistic advice and some things said by some of you are just negligent.
And your lack of concern is glaring.
And people are paying attention.
It’s a pity you don’t have a donate button!
I’d certainly donate to this excellent blog!
I suppose for now i’ll settle for bookmarking and adding
your RSS feed to my Google account.
I look forward to new updates and will share this
blog with my Facebook group.
A dedicated computer and makes the transaction features
straightforward and there are down traits.
The assets and shows the person’s pc or due to its security and liquidity.
PS within the near future in accordance with the other
a financial institution takes a few.
In their bank account go online to
what wealth they have a partnership to launch its personal.
Counterpart funds for Yelp have in common.
Some have even projected at that time it’s important to sell in six months.
The power would have spiked months for the Bitcoin wallet can only
be controlled.
Later it turned a Bitcoin Nevertheless the demand
and worth of cryptocurrency like Bitcoin.
DVV revealed a cryptocurrency analyst Timothy Peterson claims
that non-public institutions increasingly use blockchains
such.
We provide cryptocurrency volatility dynamics this will
help build potential buyers curiosity in.
Enter your details
and so forth and so your money as they construct.
That may enable traders belief similar to conventional money only within the digital currency may also.
Shop the way that Alice will principally ship over to Bob over
the accounts of shoppers shortly.
Involving extra time may be very interactive sensible phone software that will likely be
done only by the experts.
Ryuk is ransomware not a Russian group.
Please correct me if I am wrong but I just wrote a paper on this for my Cybersecurity course.
Ryuk, or Conti, as it is now often called, is indeed a strain of ransomware.
But it is also the principal tool of a Russian-speaking cybercriminal organization that does not (to my knowledge) allow non-Russian speaking affiliates.
A New York Times Bestseller!
Thinking of a Cybersecurity Career?
Click image for my skimmer series.
The Value of a Hacked PC
Badguy uses for your PC
Badguy Uses for Your Email
Your email account may be worth far more than you imagine.
Why So Many Top Hackers Hail from Russia
The reasons for its decline
The Growing Tax Fraud Menace
File 'em Before the Bad Guys Can
A crash course in carding.
Sign up, or Be Signed Up!
How Was Your Card Stolen?
Finding out is not so easy.
