Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
A new module for the TrickBot trojan has been discovered that targets the Active Directory database stored on compromised Windows domain controllers.
TrickBot is typically download and installed on a computer through other malware.
This most common malware that installs TrickBot is Emotet, which is distributed through spam with malicious Word document attachments.
Once TrickBot is installed, it will harvest various information from a compromised computer and will then attempt to spread laterally throughout a network to gather more data.
To perform this behavior, TrickBot will download various modules that perform specific behavior such as stealing cookies, browser information, OpenSSH keys, and spreading to other computers.
As part of the malware's continued evolution, a new TrickBot module called 'ADll' was discovered by security researcher Sandor Nemes that executes a variety of Windows commands that allows the trojan to steal a Windows Active Directory database.
Before we get to how TrickBot steals an Active Directory database to harvest login credentials, we first need to give a bit of background about a special file called ntds.dit.
When a server is promoted as a domain controller, the Active Directory database will be created and saved to the default C:\Windows\NTDS folder on the DC.
Inside this folder is a file called ntds.dit, which is a database that contains all Active Directory services information such as users, passwords, groups, computers, etc.
As this information is sensitive, Windows encrypts the data using a BootKey stored in the System hive of the Registry.
As the ntds.dit is always opened by the domain controller, it also not possible to access it normally using standard file operations.
To be able to work with the ntds.dit database while it is open, Windows domain controllers have a tool called ntdsutil that allows administrators to perform database maintenance.
Using ntdsutil, administrators can perform the "ifm" (Install from Media) command to create a dump of the Active Directory.
This command is meant to be used to create installation media that can quickly set up new Domain controllers without having to wait for the Active Directory to replicate.
If TrickBot is able to gain administrative access to a domain controller, it will abuse this command to create a copy of the domain's Active Directory database and steal it.
TrickBot's new ADll module takes advantage of the "Install from Media" command to dump the Active Directory database and various Registry hives to the %Temp% folder.
These files are then compressed and sent back to the attackers.
In a conversation with BleepingComputer, Nemes explained that the ADll module will generate an 8 character ID based on the TrickBot client ID.
The module will then use this ID as the filename argument for the following executed commands:
When executed, the commands will dump the Active Directory database as well as the SAM, Security, and SYSTEM hives.
When done, Nemes says the module will check if the files exist, compress them, and then exfiltrate the files back to the attacker's servers.
Now that the attackers have access to these files, they can decrypt the Active Directory database and dump the usernames, password hashes, computer names, groups, and other data.
This data can then be used to further spread laterally throughout the network and is especially helpful for the actors behind the Ryuk Ransomware, which is typically the final payload for TrickBot infections.
To illustrate how the TrickBot module works and what data it can gather using, BleepingComputer set up a small Windows domain.
Once set up, we execute the first command of "ntdsutil "ac in ntds" "ifm" "cr fu %TEMP%\H00i0Z000.dat" q q", which dumps the Active Directory database to the %TEMP%\H00i0Z000.dat folder.
We also executed the module's reg commands to save the SAM, Security, and SYSTEM hives to files.
When done, our %Temp% folder contained a folder containing the Active Directory database and three dat files that are the saved Registry hives.
Inside the H00i0Z001.dat folder is the dumped ntds.dit database file.
Using the DSInternals PowerShell modules we can easily extract the BootKey decryption key from the System hive using the "Get-Bootkey -SystemHivePath '.\H00i0Z003.dat'" command.
Finally, we execute the DSInternals command "Get-ADDBAccount -All -DBPath 'C:\Users\sanje\Desktop\NTDS\ntds.dit' -Bootkey [key]" to decrypt the database and view all of the accounts, including their NTML password hashes, as seen below.
Attackers can then take these hashes and run them through cracking programs to determine the actual plain-text passwords for these users.
These account credentials can then be used by the attackers to compromise other devices on the network.
Active Directory exploitation is a serious subject and is important for domain administrators to become familiarized with it.
I recommend the "Att&ckingActive Directory for fun and profit" by Huy Kha to learn about different ways that attackers can access data stored in the Active Directory.
Head of SentinelLabs Vitali Kremez also has a very informative video on how Trickbot and Ryuk exploit Active Directory services for their benefit.
Microsoft: Nobelium uses custom malware to backdoor Windows domains
Microsoft rushes to register Autodiscover domains leaking credentials
Microsoft Exchange Autodiscover bugs leak 100K Windows credentials
Windows PetitPotam attacks can be blocked using new method
Windows 365 exposes Microsoft Azure credentials in plaintext
Is Ntdsutil.exe used for any other function than special circumstances by Admins?
Would a mitigation for this threat be as simple as renaming that file to something else, or would that break something?
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
