Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Office furniture giant Steelcase has suffered a ransomware attack that forced them to shut down their network to contain the attack's spread.
Steelcase is the largest office furniture manufacturer globally, with 13,000 employees and $3.7 billion in 2020.
In an 8-K form filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Steelcase has disclosed that they were the victim of a cyberattack on October 22nd, 2020.
On October 22, 2020, Steelcase Inc. (the “Company”) detected a cyberattack on its information technology systems.
The Company promptly implemented a series of containment measures to address this situation including temporarily shutting down the affected systems and related operations.
The Company is actively engaged in restoring the affected systems and returning to normal levels of operations.
At this time, the Company is not aware of any data loss from its systems or any other loss of assets as a result of this attack.
Although cyberattacks can be unpredictable, the Company does not currently expect this incident will have a material impact on its business operations or its financial results.
BleepingComputer has been actively tracking this attack after a source in the cybersecurity industry told us last week that Steelcase suffered a Ryuk ransomware attack.
We were told that Steelcase's devices were encrypted by Ryuk after first being targeted by the same group behind the recent attack on Sopra Steria and Universal Health Services.
If you have first-hand information about this or other unreported cyberattacks, you can confidentially contact us on Signal at +16469613731 or on Wire at @lawrenceabrams-bc.
Those attacks utilized either the BazarLoader or TrickBot infections, which ultimately provide remote access to the Ryuk Ransomware threat actors, who then compromise the rest of the network and deploy Ryuk.
It is unknown how many devices were encrypted or if business operations were impacted other than the shutting down of the network.
BleepingComputer has contacted Steelcase with further questions but has not heard back.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
