Unit 42 spent six months researching the China-based cybercrime group Rocke, which is the best-known threat actor engaged in cryptomining operations targeting the cloud.
We released high-level results from our investigation of Rocke in our recent cloud threat report.
This research report provides a deep dive into our investigation of Rocke, which concluded that the group is able to conduct operations with little interference and limited detection risk.
By analyzing NetFlow data from December 2018 to June 16, 2019, we found that 28.1% of the cloud environments we surveyed had at least one fully established network connection with at least one known Rocke command-and-control (C2) domain.
Several of those organizations maintained near daily connections.
Meanwhile, 20% of the organizations maintained hourly heartbeats consistent with Rocke tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs).
The group has also released a new tool called Godlua, which could function as an agent, allowing the group’s actors to perform additional scripted operations, including denial of service (DoS) attacks, network proxying, and two shell capabilities.
Unit 42 also discovered network traffic identification patterns within NetFlow traffic that provide unique insight into Rocke TTPs and how defenders can develop detection capabilities.
The activities of Rocke, aka the Iron Group, SystemTen, Kerberods/Khugepageds, and even ex-Rocke, were originally reported in August 2018.
Researchers have since blogged on its use of the Golang programming language and the new backdoor, Godlua.
There is an operational blog mapping Rocke operations to the MITRE ATT&CK framework.
Unit 42 has also published blogs on the group’s Xbash ransomware tool and its cloud security evasion and cryptomining techniques.
Rocke was initially associated with ransomware campaigns through the use of its Linux-focused Xbash tool, a data-destruction malware similar in functionality to NotPetya.
NotPetya used the EternalBlue exploit to propagate across a network.
Xbash performed lateral movement by leveraging an organization’s unpatched vulnerabilities and use of weak passwords, which potentially limited its overall effectiveness.
When Rocke compromised an organization, it demanded that victims pay 0.2, 0.15, or 0.02 bitcoin (BTC) to restore lost data.
However, Rocke was unable to restore any data since Xbash deleted database tables prior to demanding the ransom.
At the time of Unit 42’s reporting, Rocke’s BTC wallet contained 0.964 BTC (equivalent to US$10,130 today) from just 48 unique transfers.
Like Rocke’s Xbash malware, the group’s first cryptomining operations were written in Python and used Pastebin or GitHub as the code repository from which the first-stage payload was downloaded.
As of March 12, 2019, Rocke actors began to also use Golang.
The first-stage payload directed the victim system to connect to a hardcoded Rocke domain or IP address, which would trigger the download of the second-stage payload.
Unit 42 has observed a distinctive 12-step operation style, which appears to have remained consistent since Rocke was first reported:
Actor uploads first payload to a third-party site (e.g., Pastebin, GitHub)
Entices victim to navigate to Pastebin/GitHub (e.g., spear phishing)
Exploits known vulnerability (e.g., Oracle WebLogic, Adobe ColdFusion, Apache Struts)
Victim downloads backdoor (e.g., Shell Scripts, JavaScript Backdoor)
Victim runs the first payload via Python or Golang script and connects to C2 server
Downloads and executes second payload script, gaining administrative access to the system
Establishes persistence via cron job commands
Searchers for and kills previously installed cryptomining processes
Adds “IPtables” rules to block future cryptomining processes
Uninstalls agent-based cloud security tools (e.g., Tencent Cloud, Alibaba Cloud)
Downloads and installs Monero mining software
Rootkits XMRig mining processes from Linux “ps” using “libprocesshider”
As of the time of this writing, eight domains have been tied to Rocke C2 operations through hardcoded IP addresses, URL addresses, or domain registration connections (e.g., WHOIS registrant email address).
The following chart lays out how the domains fit into the Rocke group infrastructure (see Table 1).
