As part of ongoing threat research, Palo Alto Networks Unit 42 threat researchers have discovered 28 new vulnerabilities addressed by the Adobe Product Security Incident Response Team (PSIRT) as part of their May Adobe Security Bulletin APSB19-18 and five Foxit Reader vulnerabilities addressed by Foxit Software as part of their recent security update releases.
The Adobe vulnerabilities discovered included 19 Critical and 9 Important rated vulnerabilities.
Palo Alto Networks customers with a Threat Prevention subscription who deploy our Security Operating Platform are protected from zero-day vulnerabilities such as these.
Weaponized exploits for these vulnerabilities are prevented by Traps multi-layered exploit prevention and response capabilities.
Threat Prevention capabilities, such as vulnerability protection with IPS and WildFire, provide our customers with comprehensive protection and automatic updates against previously unknown threats.
Palo Alto Networks appreciates both the recognition and credit Adobe and Foxit Software have given our Unit 42 threat researchers.
Palo Alto Networks is a regular contributor to vulnerability research in Microsoft, Adobe, Apple, Google Android, and other ecosystems with more than 200 critical vulnerabilities discovered.
By proactively identifying these vulnerabilities, developing protections for our customers, and sharing the information with the security community, we are removing weapons used by attackers to threaten users and compromise enterprise, government, and service provider networks.
Palo Alto Networks will also present security research findings at the upcoming, prestigious Microsoft BlueHat Shanghai 2019.
Two papers were accepted titled, “Is my Container Secure?
Large-Scale Empirical Study on Container Vulnerabilities” by Authors Zhaoyan Xu, Yue Guan, Cecilia Hu, Bo Qu, and Xin Ouyang.
The other paper is “Advanced Lateral Movement on Container-based K8s Cluster” by Authors Tongbo Luo and Zhaoyan Xu.
Additionally, Hui Gao, from Palo Alto Networks, was added to the content advisory board for BlueHat Shanghai 2019.
Adobe Vulnerabilities Credited:
Foxit Software Vulnerabilities Credited:
