In late February 2019, Unit 42 discovered Mirai samples compiled for new processors/architectures not previously seen before.
Despite the source code being publicly released In October of 2016, the malware has, until now, only been found targeting a fixed set of processors/architectures.
Unit 42 has found the newly discovered samples are compiled for Altera Nios II, OpenRISC, Tensilica Xtensa, and Xilinx MicroBlaze processors.
This is not the first time Mirai has been expanded for new processor architectures, samples targeting ARC CPUs were discovered in January 2018.
Yet this development shows that Mirai developers continue to actively innovate, targeting a growing array of IoT devices.
The malware gained notoriety in 2016 for its use in massive denial of service attacks on Dyn and the website of security blogger Brian Krebs.
If the latest innovations lead to an increase in the number of infected devices, that means that Mirai attackers would have access to additional firepower for use in denial of service attacks.
In this blog, we show the new features we’ve found in these new samples, discuss the infrastructure we observed, show how other Mirai samples using known exploits were hosted on the same infrastructure as the new samples, and give indicators of compromise (IoCs) for these new samples.
To protect against Mirai and other threats, organizations should make securing their IoT devices with the latest updates and non-default passwords a priority.
In addition to the being compiled for these new architectures, we have found that these new samples also contain the following new features:
Encryption algorithm: These samples make use of a modified version of the standard byte-wise XOR (as implemented in the toggle_obf function) used in the original Mirai source code.
It uses 11 8-byte keys, all of which are cumulatively byte-wise XOR-ed to get the final resulting key.
This is better illustrated in the code snippet below:
This is effectively the equivalent of a byte-wise XOR with 0x5A.
attack_method_ovh: The samples include a DDoS attack option with the following parameters:
These are the exact same parameters as the attack method “TCP SYN” (attack_method_tcpsyn) in the original Mirai source, so the reason behind incorporating a new attack method with the same parameters remains unclear.
Pivoting on this attack method in AutoFocus, we found samples circulating in the wild since November 2018 for other previously known architectures also employing it.
We found these latest samples on a single IP that at one point of time was hosting them via an open directory; however, on February 22, 2019, the server was later updated to hide the file listing but continued to host the files themselves.
Figure 1.
Open directory hosting samples of the Mirai variant
Prior to the update on February 22, the same IP was hosting Mirai samples containing the following exploits known to be used in previous versions of Mirai.
The presence of these exploits in both previous versions of Mirai and our newly discovered samples help show the tie between the two are likely used by the same attacker in this case.
These exploits are shown in Table 1, below.
