In early January 2019, Unit 42 discovered a new variant of the infamous IoT/Linux botnet Mirai.
Mirai is best known for being used in massive, unprecedented DDoS attacks in 2016.
Some of the most notable targets included: web hosting provider OVH, DNS provider Dyn and Brian Krebs’ website.
This new variant that Unit 42 discovered is notable for targeting different embedded devices like routers, network storage devices, NVRs, and IP cameras and using numerous exploits against them.
In particular, Unit 42 found this new variant targeting WePresent WiPG-1000 Wireless Presentation systems, and in LG Supersign TVs.
Both these devices are intended for use by businesses.
This development indicates to us a potential shift to using Mirai to target enterprises.
The previous instance where we observed the botnet targeting enterprise vulnerabilities was with the incorporation of exploits against Apache Struts and SonicWall.
In addition to this newer targeting, this new variant of Mirai includes new exploits in its multi-exploit battery, as well as new credentials to use in brute force against devices.
Finally, the malicious payload was hosted at a compromised website in Colombia: an “Electronic security, integration and alarm monitoring” business.
These new features afford the botnet a large attack surface.
In particular, targeting enterprise links also grants it access to larger bandwidth, ultimately resulting in greater firepower for the botnet for DDoS attacks.
These developments underscore the importance for enterprises to be aware of the IoT devices on their network, change default passwords, ensure that devices are fully up-to-date on patches.
And in the case of devices that cannot be patched, to remove those devices from the network as a last resort.
This latest sample contains a total of 27 exploits, of which are 11 new to Mirai.
A full list of the exploits we have observed are listed in the Appendix.
Table 1 lists exploits that haven’t been observed in the wild prior to this sample and Table 2 lists other exploits included in this variant have been observed only recently in the wild but were incorporated in variants prior to this one.
Aside from the incorporation of unusual exploits, this new variant had some other differentiating features:
It makes use of the same encryption scheme as is characteristic of Mirai with a table key of 0xbeafdead.
When decrypting strings using this key, we found certain unusual default credentials for brute force that we haven’t come across until now: admin:huigu309 root:huigu309 CRAFTSPERSON:ALC#FGU root:videoflow
admin:huigu309
root:huigu309
CRAFTSPERSON:ALC#FGU
root:videoflow
It uses the domain epicrustserver.cf at port 3933 is for C2 communication.
In addition to scanning for other vulnerable devices, the new version can be commanded to send out HTTP Flood DDoS attacks.
Ironically, the shell script payload (still live, at the time of this writing) fetched by the exploits in this variant is hosted at the compromised website for an “Electronic security, integration and alarm monitoring” business in Colombia.
Figure 1.
Shell script payload fetched by exploits
Additionally, the binaries downloaded by the shell script were named in the format “clean.
[arch]” (e.g.
clean.x86, clean.mips etc.
), however they don’t appear to be hosted at the website any longer.
Pivoting on the payload source revealed some samples fetching the same payload that were hosted at 185.248.140.102/bins/.
The same IP was hosting some Gafgyt samples using the name format “eeppinen.
[arch]” a few days prior to the upgrade to this new multi-exploit variant.
IoT/Linux botnets continue to expand their attack surface, either by the incorporation of multiple exploits targeting a plethora of devices, or by adding to the list of default credentials they brute force, or both.
In addition, targeting enterprise vulnerabilities allows them access to links with potentially larger bandwidth than consumer device links, affording them greater firepower for DDoS attacks.
Palo Alto Networks customers are protected by:
WildFire detects all related samples with malicious verdicts.
All exploits and IPs/URLs involved in these campaigns are blocked through Threat Prevention and PANDB.
AutoFocus customers can track these activities using individual exploit tags:
CVE-2018-17173
WePresentCmdInjection
DLinkRCE
ZyxelP660HN_RCE
CVE-2016-1555
NetgearDGN2200_RCE
NetgearProsafeRCE
NetgearReadyNAS_RCE
LinksysWAP54Gv3_RCE
CVE-2013-3568
ZTEH108L_RCE
The malware family can be tracked in AutoFocus using the tag ELFMirai
