In the summer of 2018, Unit 42 released reporting regarding activity in the Middle East surrounding a cluster of activity using similar tactics, tools, and procedures (TTPs) in which we named the adversary group DarkHydrus.
This group was observed using tactics such as registering typosquatting domains for security or technology vendors, abusing open-source penetration testing tools, and leveraging novel file types as anti-analysis techniques.
Since that initial reporting, we had not observed new activity from DarkHydrus until recently, when 360TIC published a tweet and subsequent research discussing delivery documents that appeared to be attributed to DarkHydrus.
In the process of analyzing the delivery documents, we were able to collect additional associated samples, uncover additional functionality of the payloads including the use of Google Drive API, and confirm the strong likelihood of attribution to DarkHydrus.
We have notified Google of our findings.
We collected a total of three DarkHydrus delivery documents installing a new variant of the RogueRobin trojan.
These three documents were extremely similar to each other and are all macro enabled Excel documents with .xlsm file extensions.
None of the known documents contain a lure image or message to instruct the recipient to click the Enable Content button necessary to run the macro, as seen in Figure 1.
While we cannot confirm the delivery mechanism, it is likely that the instructions to click the Enable Content button were provided during delivery, such as in the body of a spear-phishing email.
Figure 1 DarkHydrus’ delivery document does not have a lure image or message
Without the delivery mechanism we cannot confirm the exact time these delivery documents were used in an attack; however, the observed timestamps within these three delivery documents gives us an idea when the DarkHydrus actors created them.
While the creation times were timestomped to a default time of 2006-09-16 00:00:00Z commonly observed in malicious documents, the Last Modified times were still available and suggest that DarkHydrus created these documents in December 2018 and January 2019.
Table 1 shows the breakdown of timestamps and their associated sample hashes.
