Palo Alto Networks Unit 42 threat researchers have been credited with discovering 27 new vulnerabilities addressed by the Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC), as part of its last nine months of security update releases.
The Microsoft vulnerabilities discovered included 27 vulnerabilities rated “important,” including Remote Code Execution, Privilege Elevation, Information Disclosure and one Denial of Service vulnerability.
The Unit 42 researchers credited are Zhibin Zhang, Tao Yan, Bo Qu, Gal De Leon, Haozhe Zhang, Bar Lahav, Yaron Samuel and Nadav Markus.
Zhibin Zhang was also recognized as the top vulnerability discoverer in Q1 from the MSRC and most recently ranked 7th for the MSRC 2020 Q2 Security Leaderboard.
The recently discovered vulnerabilities are listed in Table 1 below:
Palo Alto Networks customers deploying our Next-Generation Firewalls with our best practices and a Threat Prevention subscription, which includes capabilities such as vulnerability protection with intrusion prevention system (IPS), are protected from zero-day vulnerabilities such as these.
Weaponized exploits for these vulnerabilities are prevented by Cortex XDR’s multi-layered exploit prevention capabilities.
WildFire provides our customers with comprehensive protection and automatic updates against previously unknown threats.
Palo Alto Networks is a regular contributor to vulnerability research in Microsoft, Adobe, Apple, Google Android and other ecosystems, with more than 200 critical vulnerabilities discovered.
Our researchers give regular talks at security conferences such as BlueHat and Black Hat.
By proactively identifying these vulnerabilities, developing protections for our customers and sharing the information with the security community, we are removing weapons used by attackers to threaten users and compromise enterprise, government and service provider networks.
Last year, Unit 42 also won first place as a top zero-day vulnerability contributor and tied for third for top vulnerability contributor as part of the Microsoft Active Protections Program (MAPP) Contributing Partners awards.
We are proud of the continued efforts made by our threat intelligence research team, as they continue to leave a positive impact on the security ecosystem.
