Be the first to receive the latest news, cyber threat intelligence and research from Unit 42.
Subscribe Now.
Unit 42 is currently researching an attack campaign that targets government and military personnel of India.
This attack appears to overlap with the Operation Transparent Tribe and Operation C-Major campaigns that targeted Indian embassies in Saudi Arabia and Kazakhstan, as well as the Indian military.
We are tracking the group of actors involved in this campaign as ‘ProjectM.’ During our research, we found a linkage between the infrastructure used by ProjectM and an individual from Pakistan.
We cannot definitively confirm this individual is involved with this attack campaign, but the evidence that we will discuss in this blog post suggests that it is highly likely that this individual has some involvement with the threat group.
This blog post highlights the trail of evidence individuals leave on the Internet when they are not careful about disguising their identity.
All of the information collected about this actor is public and accessible through open source research.
The ProjectM actors rely on both spear-phishing emails and watering hole sites to deliver a variety of different tools to target the Indian government and military.
ProjectM actors used a blog with a theme related to the Indian military titled “India News Tribe” (intribune.blogspot.com) as a watering hole to deliver their payloads.
This group also used spear-phishing emails with malicious RTF files exploiting CVE-2010-3333 or CVE-2012-0158, in addition to Excel files that contained malicious macros to download and install their payloads as well.
The actors have access to a sizeable toolset of Trojans that they use in their attack campaigns, including custom developed tools called Crimson and Peppy, along with off-the-shelf remote administration tools (RATs) and downloaders, such as DarkComet and Bozok.
Another interesting part of this campaign is the use of techniques and Trojans often seen in cybercrime attacks, such as the use of the Andromeda Trojan as an initial payload in their attacks to download and execute other tools in their toolset.
The Operation Transparent Tribe report by Darien Huss of Proofpoint provides an excellent analysis of the various tools used by this group, including Crimson and Peppy and their associated infrastructure.
During our research, we analyzed the registration information of the Andromeda, Crimson and Peppy Trojan command and control domains used by ProjectM.
A majority of the infrastructure associated with ProjectM was registered using WHOIS protection services, which conceals the actual registrant’s information (name, email, etc.)
used to register the domain name.
However, we discovered that the actors had in all likelihood, inadvertently neglected to use WHOIS protection on two domains in their infrastructure that they used to host C2 servers for the Andromeda Trojan.
The two undisguised domains were “winupdater.info” and “ordering-checks.com”, which were registered using the email address “mshoaib.yaseen [at] gmail.com”, as seen in Figure 1.
The Andromeda samples used these undisguised domains to deliver Peppy Trojans that used the previously observed ProjectM domain “bbmdroid.com” as a C2 server.
The email address and information used to register these domains appears to be real and associated with the actor, which differs from most infrastructure used in targeted attacks that use fake information and a disposable email account during registration.
On August 5, 2014, the actor seemingly discovered his mistake as the “ordering-checks.com” domain was updated with WHOIS protection.
