Unit 42 researchers have observed recent EKANS (Snake backward) ransomware activity affecting multiple industries in the U.S and Europe.
As a result, we’ve created this threat assessment report for the activities of this ransomware.
Identified techniques and campaigns can be visualized using the Unit 42 Playbook Viewer.
EKANS, which was first observed in January 2020, has relatively basic ransomware behavior, as it primarily seeks to encrypt your files and display a ransom note when finished.
Although EKANS is basic in terms of file encryption, it’s worth mentioning that it does have some interesting functionalities that make it distinct from other ransomware strains.
EKANS ransomware is written in Golang and includes a static “kill list” that will stop numerous antivirus and Industrial Control Systems (ICS) processes and services.
After killing the processes, it then proceeds to delete shadow copies to disable any restoration capabilities.
Like many ransomware malware families, EKANS attempts to also encrypt resources connected to the victim’s machine via the network.
After encrypting files, EKANS doesn’t follow a uniform extension change like other active ransomware.
Instead, EKANS modifies the extension with five random characters.
This may be an attempt by the creators of the ransomware to evade instant detection by just looking at the file extensions.
One way to identify an EKANS infection is by looking for the hexadecimal string of EKANS at the end of the file, which is added by the ransomware.
EKANS’ intrusion vector at the moment seems to be spearphishing, to compromise credentials.
Having file-blocking policies in place, and securing any open Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) ports will help prevent the malware from entering the network.
We encourage ICS asset owners to review their security posture against malware, such as EKANS, that aims to disrupt ICS operations.
The EKANS operators have affected different industries including energy, architecture firms, healthcare, transportation, and manufacturing.
Palo Alto Networks Threat Prevention platform with WildFire, and Cortex XDR detects activity associated with this ransomware.
Customers can also review activity associated with this Threat Assessment using AutoFocus with the following tag: EKANS.
Several adversarial techniques were observed in this activity and the following measures are suggested within Palo Alto Networks’ products and services to ensure mitigation of threats related with the EKANS ransomware, as well as other malware using the similar techniques:
