Docker containers have been gaining popularity over the past few years as an effective way of packaging software applications.
Docker Hub provides a strong community-based model for users and companies to share their software applications.
This is also attracting the attention of malicious actors intending to make money by cryptojacking within Docker containers and using Docker Hub to distribute these images.
We identified a malicious Docker Hub account, azurenql, active since October 2019 that was hosting six malicious images intended to mine the cryptocurrency, Monero.
The coin mining code within the image intends to evade network detection by using network anonymizing tools such as ProxyChains and Tor.
The images hosted on this account have been collectively pulled more than two million times.
For context, there are legitimate Azure related images under the official Microsoft Docker Hub account that have anywhere from a few thousand to 100 million+ pulls.
One of the wallet IDs identified has been used to earn more than 525.38 XMR, which roughly translates to $36,000 USD.
Additionally, when we last checked minexmr.com for this wallet ID, we saw recent activity indicating that it’s still being used.
We would like to give a shout out to the awesome security team at Docker Hub.
They were very responsive and were able to take down this malicious Docker Hub account quickly in response to our notification.
Palo Alto Networks customers are protected by this threat through Threat Prevention signatures on the Next-Generation Firewall.
Prisma Cloud customers are protected by this through the Trusted Images feature.
We have identified a Docker Hub community user account named azurenql that contained eight repositories hosting six malicious Monero mining images.
Here is a screenshot of the account and its repositories.
Table 1, below, provides a summary of all the images found under this Docker Hub account, listed in descending order of their pull counts.
It is worth noting that the top image was pulled more than 1.47 million times.
