Unit 42 researchers recently published on activity by the Hangover threat group (aka Neon, Viceroy Tiger, MONSOON) carrying out targeted cyberattacks deploying BackConfig malware attacks against government and military organizations in South Asia.
As a result, we’ve created this threat assessment report for the Hangover Group’s activities.
The techniques and campaigns can be visualized using the Unit 42 Playbook Viewer.
Hangover Group is a cyberespionage group that was first observed in December 2013 carrying on a cyberattack against a telecom corporation in Norway.
Cybersecurity firm Norman reported that the cyberattacks were emerging from India and the group sought and carried on attacks against targets of national interest, such as Pakistan and China.
However, there have been indicators of Hangover activity in the U.S. and Europe.
Mainly focusing on government, military, and civilian organizations.
The Hangover Group’s initial vector of compromise is to carry out spear-phishing campaigns.
The group uses local and topical news lures from the South Asia region to make their victims more prone to falling into their social engineering techniques, making them download and execute a weaponized Microsoft Office document.
After the user executes the weaponized document, backdoor communication is established between BackConfig and the threat actors, allowing attackers to carry on espionage activity, potentially exfiltrating sensitive data from compromised systems.
Palo Alto Networks Threat Prevention platform with WildFire, DNS Security and Cortex XDR detects activity associated with this threat group.
Customers can also review activity associated with this Threat Assessment using AutoFocus with the following tags: Hangover and BackConfig.
Several adversarial techniques were observed in this activity and the following measures are suggested within Palo Alto Networks’ products and services to ensure mitigation of threats related with the Hangover Group, as well as other groups using the same techniques:
