Between October 2019 through the beginning of December 2019, Unit 42 observed multiple instances of phishing attacks likely related to a threat group known as Molerats (AKA Gaza Hackers Team and Gaza Cybergang) targeting eight organizations in six different countries in the government, telecommunications, insurance and retail industries, of which the latter two were quite peculiar.
The targeting of insurance and retail organizations is peculiar as it does not fit with this threat groups prior target set.
The email subject and attachment file names used in the attacks on these seemingly atypical targets were similar in theme as those used when attacking government organizations.
The lack of industry or target specific social engineering themes likely lowers the chances of a successful compromise and further confuses our understanding of the purpose of attacking these organizations.
All of the attacks involved spear-phishing emails to deliver malicious documents that required the recipient to carry out some action.
The social engineering techniques included lure images attempting to trick the user into enabling content to run a macro and even document contents that threaten to release compromising pictures to the media to coerce the user into clicking a link to download a malicious payload.
The payload in a majority of these attacks was a backdoor called Spark, which is a backdoor that allows the threat actors to open applications and run command line commands on the compromised system.
The Spark backdoor has been used by Molerats since at least 2017 and is associated with the Operation Parliament campaign, which is attributed to the Gaza Cybergang.
The payload delivered in one of the attacks appears to be related to JhoneRAT, which may suggest the threat group has added another custom payload to their toolset.
Molerats has been in operation as far back as 2011 targeting government organizations around the world, largely been associated with attacks involving unauthorized access and sensitive data collection.They have been observed using a bevy of tactics and techniques, ranging from leveraging publicly available backdoor tools, such as PoisonIvy or XtremeRAT, to creating custom developed ones such as KASPERAGENT and MICROPSIA.
In the campaign that we tracked, this group primarily relied on social engineering and spear-phishing techniques for their initial infection vector, then multi-stage command-and-control (C2) servers for malware delivery.
Molerats used a variety of techniques to make detection and analysis difficult, such as password-protecting delivery documents, limiting the execution of the Spark payload to only run on systems with an Arabic keyboard and locale and the use of the commercial packer Enigma to obfuscate the payloads.
The Spark C2 channel also attempts to evade detection, as the data in the HTTP POST requests and responses is encrypted using either 3DES or AES with randomly generated keys that appear to be unique for each payload.
In November 2019, Unit 42 was made aware of a single phishing email directed at a Saudi Arabian government organization.
This attack involved a password-protected Microsoft Word document, which contained an embedded macro.
The password for the document was provided to the victim in the body of the email.
From the artifacts discovered in this attack, we were able to use our AutoFocus product to pivot to additional attacks and uncover what turned out to be an attack campaign by Molerats.
Using our AutoFocus tool, we were able to find several attacks sent from the actors starting on October 2 through December 9, 2019.
The emails were sent to organizations in the government and telecommunications verticals and had a mixture of specific and generic email subjects and attachment filenames.
We also saw sessions associated with this attack campaign involving two US-based organizations, one in the retail and the other in the insurance industry.
The files attached to these emails were all documents, with the majority being Word documents and one PDF document.
Table 1 shows a list of the emails used in this attack campaign, including the details of the email and the country and industry of the targeted organization.
In this blog, we will provide an analysis of three of the seven delivery documents listed in Table 1, as the four unique delivery documents with MOFA in their file names are extremely similar to each other.
The last delivery document (‘Urgent.docx’) was the delivery document discussed in Cisco Talos’ research on a new payload called JhoneRAT, which may suggest that this group also uses JhoneRAT in their attack campaigns in the region.
