Palo Alto Networks’ Unit 42 threat researchers have been credited with discovering six new vulnerabilities addressed by the Adobe Product Security Incident Response Team (PSIRT) as part of its December Adobe Security Bulletin APSB19-55 security updates.
Additionally, seven new “important” rated vulnerabilities were addressed by the Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC) as part of its September, October and November 2019 security update releases.
The Adobe vulnerabilities discovered included two “critical” and four “important” rated vulnerabilities, while the severity of the Microsoft vulnerabilities discovered were all rated “important”.
The Unit 42 researchers credited are Bo Qu, Zhibin Zhang, Qi Deng, Ken Hsu, Lexuan Sun, Hao Cai, Yue Guan, Haozhe Zhang, Hui Gao, Gal De Leon, Bar Lahav, Nadav Markus and Yaron Samuel.
This is the first Microsoft and Adobe vulnerability discoveries credited to Ken Hsu, Lexuan Sun, Hao Cai, Yue Guan, Haozhe Zhang, Nadav Markus and Yaron Samuel.
The recently discovered exploits are listed in Table 1 below:
Table 1.
Critical and important vulnerabilities discovered in Adobe and Microsoft products
Palo Alto Networks customers using deploying our Next-Generation Firewalls with our best practices and a Threat Prevention Subscription are protected from zero-day vulnerabilities such as these.
Weaponized exploits for these vulnerabilities are prevented by Traps’ multi-layered exploit prevention capabilities.
Threat prevention capabilities such as vulnerability protection with IPS and WildFire provide our customers with comprehensive protection and automatic updates against previously unknown threats.
Palo Alto Networks is a regular contributor to vulnerability research in Microsoft, Adobe, Apple, Google Android, and other ecosystems, with more than 200 critical vulnerabilities discovered and regular talks at security conferences such as BlueHat and BlackHat.
By proactively identifying these vulnerabilities, developing protections for our customers, and sharing the information with the security community, we are removing weapons used by attackers to threaten users and compromise enterprise, government, and service provider networks.
