A few days ago, I found an interesting file delivered by email (why change a winning combination?).
The file has a nice extension: “.daa” (Direct Access Archive).
We already reported such files in 2019 and Didier wrote a diary[1] about them.
Default Windows installation, can’t process “.daa” files, you need a specific tool to open them (like PowerISO).
I converted the archive into an ISO file and extracted the PE file inside it.
The sample was called “E445333###.exe” (SHA256:853a7edf8144e06014e0c1a841d1f1840de954a866d5ce73ff12833394ff0ead) and has a VT score of 48/70[2].
It’s a classic Agent.Tesla but this one uses another C2 channel to exfiltrate data.
Instead of using open email servers, it uses Telegram (the messenger application).
I started to debug the PE file (a classic .Net executable) but it took a lot of time before reaching some interesting activity so I took another approach and went back to a classic behavioral analysis.
I fired a REM Workstation, connected it to the Internet through a REMnux, and launched the executable.
It took some time (approx 15 mins) before I saw the first connection to api[.]telegram[.
A few minutes later, the Trojan started to exfiltrate screenshots:
The file that is uploaded contains a timestamp.
This confirmed to me that a screenshot is exfiltrated every hour.
Because we know the bot ID, we can interact with it.
Let’s check the bot info:
The user the bot is talking to is "Graciasmith1" (still online on Telegram when I'm writing this diary).
Let's make it aware that we are also alive:
As you can see, today it's very touchy to spot malicious activity just by watching classic IOCs like IP addresses or domain names.
Except if you prevent your users to access social networks like Telegram, who will flag traffic to api.telegram.org as suspicious?
Behavioral monitoring can be the key: You can see requests at regular intervals, outside business hours, or from hosts that should not execute social network applications.
Because your servers can access the Internet directly, right?
Xavier Mertens (@xme)
Senior ISC Handler - Freelance Cyber Security Consultant
PGP Key
