Sources: Attacks linked to a hacker group known as Fox Kitten (or Parisite), considered Iran's "spear tip" when it comes to cyber-attacks.


                        Cyberwar and the Future of Cybersecurity
Today's security threats have expanded in scope and seriousness.
There can now be millions -- or even billions -- of dollars at risk when information security isn't handled properly.
A group of elite hackers associated with the Iranian government has been detected attacking the US private and government sector, according to a security alert sent by the FBI last week.
While the alert, called a Private Industry Notification, didn't identify the hackers by name, sources have told ZDNet that the group is tracked by the larger cyber-security community under codenames such as Fox Kitten or Parisite.
A former government cyber-security analyst, now working for a private security firm, called the group as Iran's "spear tip" when it comes to cyber-attacks.
He described the group's primary task as having to provide an "initial beachead" to other Iranian hacking groups — such as APT33 (Shamoon), Oilrig (APT34), or Chafer.
To reach its goals, Fox Kitten primarily operates by attacking high-end and expensive network equipment using exploits for recently disclosed vulnerabilities, before companies had enough time to patch devices.
Due to the nature of the devices they attack, targets primarily include large private corporations and government networks.
Once the hackers gain access to a device, they install a web shell or backdoor, transforming the equipment into a gateway into the hacked network.
According to reports published by cyber-security firms ClearSky and Dragos earlier this year, Fox Kitten has been using this modus operandi since the summer of 2019, when it began heavily targeting vulnerabilities such as:
FBI officials also warn that this group isn't targeting any particular sector, and any company running a BIG-IP device is likely to be targeted.
While the FBI asked US companies to patch their on-premise BIG-IP devices to prevent successful intrusions, FBI officials also shared details about a typical Fox Kitten attack, so companies can deploy countermeasures and detection rules.
These details are similar to what ClearSky detailed in their February 2020 report.
"Following successful compromise of the VPN server, the actors obtain legitimate credentials and establish persistence on the server through webshells.
The actors conduct internal reconnaissance post-exploitation using tools such as NMAP and Angry IP scanner.
The actors deploy Mimikatz to capture credentials while on the network, and Juicy Potato for privilege escalation.
The actors create new users while on the network [...]"
The actors use several applications for command and control (C2) while exploiting victim networks, including Chisel (C2 tunnel), ngrok, Plink, and SSHNET (reverse SSH shell).
When tracking suspected C2 activity, the FBI advises that C2 activity with ngrok may be with external infrastructure associated with ngrok."
But while the FBI alert doesn't say it, sources have told ZDNet that Fox Kitten attacks against BIG-IP devices have been successful.
A security researcher working for a US cyber-security firm told ZDNet that the FBI sent out the PIN alert last week after agents were called to investigate two successful intrusions where Fox Kitten hackers managed to breach US companies.
Due to non-disclosure agreements, the source could not identify the two companies, nor could they confirm these are the same "two compromises" mentioned in a similar alert sent out by the Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (DHS CISA) on July 24.
Either way, Iran's state-sponsored hacking groups aren't the only threat actors that have targeted the BIG-IP vulnerability.
Multiple hacker groups began exploiting this bug within two days after details and proof-of-concept exploits became public, and in recent weeks, an exploit for the BIG-IP bug has even been spotted part of a Mirai-based DDoS botnet.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
