Automatically investigate security alerts to reduce false positives.
Validate that security controls are working as expected.
Take decisive action with industry leading threat intelligence.
Fully map your entire environment to mitigate risks.
Defend your enterprise with managed detection and response.
Battle-test how well your security program performs.
Establish and properly orchestrate cyber defenses.
Train your security team to effectively protect your enterprise.
See case studies and customer testimonials.
Read expert perspectives and industry news.
Expand your cyber security knowledge base.
Listen to our State of the Hack, Eye on Security and Cyber Security Effectiveness podcasts.
Threat Intelligence from front line experts.
Explore the latest views on key threats, trends and predictions.
From at least January to April 2020, suspected Vietnamese actors APT32 carried out intrusion campaigns against Chinese targets that Mandiant Threat Intelligence believes was designed to collect intelligence on the COVID-19 crisis.
Spear phishing messages were sent by the actor to China's Ministry of Emergency Management as well as the government of Wuhan province, where COVID-19 was first identified.
The first known instance of this campaign was on Jan. 6, 2020, when APT32 sent an email with an embedded tracking link (Figure 1) to China's Ministry of Emergency Management using the sender address lijianxiang1870@163[.
]com and the subject 第一期办公设备招标结果报告 (translation: Report on the first quarter results of office equipment bids).
The embedded link contained the victim's email address and code to report back to the actors if the email was opened.
Figure 1: Phishing email to China's Ministry of Emergency Management
Mandiant Threat Intelligence uncovered additional tracking URLs that revealed targets in China's Wuhan government and an email account also associated with the Ministry of Emergency Management.
]com domain was used in December as a command and control domain for a METALJACK phishing campaign likely targeting Southeast Asian countries.
APT32 likely used COVID-19-themed malicious attachments against Chinese speaking targets.
While we have not uncovered the full execution chain, we uncovered a METALJACK loader displaying a Chinese-Language titled COVID-19 decoy document while launching its payload.
When the METALJACK loader, krpt.dll (MD5: d739f10933c11bd6bd9677f91893986c) is loaded, the export "_force_link_krpt" is likely called.
The loader executes one of its embedded resources, a COVID-themed RTF file, displaying the content to the victim and saving the document to %TEMP%.
The decoy document (Figure 2) titled 冠状病毒实时更新：中国正在追踪来自湖北的旅行者, MD5: c5b98b77810c5619d20b71791b820529 (Translation: COVID-19 live updates: China is currently tracking all travelers coming from Hubei Province) displays a copy of a New York Times article to the victim.
Figure 2: COVID-themed decoy document
The malware also loads shellcode in an additional resource, MD5: a4808a329b071a1a37b8d03b1305b0cb, which contains the METALJACK payload.
The shellcode performs a system survey to collect the victim's computer name and username and then appends those values to a URL string using libjs.inquirerjs[.]com.
It then attempts to call out to the URL.
If the callout is successful, the malware loads the METALJACK payload into memory.
]com for command and control.
The COVID-19 crisis poses an intense, existential concern to governments, and the current air of distrust is amplifying uncertainties, encouraging intelligence collection on a scale that rivals armed conflict.
National, state or provincial, and local governments, as well as non-government organizations and international organizations, are being targeted, as seen in reports.
Medical research has been targeted as well, according to public statements by a Deputy Assistant Director of the FBI.
Until this crisis ends, we anticipate related cyber espionage will continue to intensify globally.
Spearphishing Attachment (T1193), Spearphising Link (T1192)
Regsvr32 (T1117), User Execution (T1204)
Standard Cryptographic Protocol (T1032), Custom Command and Control Protocol (T1094)
