The modern cyber threat landscape hides nasty surprises for companies, especially for the most structured and complex companies.
Many times, threat actors develop very dangerous and effective techniques using tools and technologies in a smart, unattended way.
This is the case of a particular cyber criminal group operating cyber intrusion against one of the most targeted and cyber-mature industry sectors: the Banking sector.
During the last years our defense and intelligence operations spotted and tracked some of the operations of a particular Threat Group targeting financial institutions worldwide, in Europe and especially in Italy, at least since 2015.
This particular cyber criminal group has been recently publicly disclosed with the name UNC1945 by Mandiant (TH-239 in our internal KB), presenting the findings of a particular investigation they recently took part and referencing an intrusion potentially dated back to 2018.
After the publication of the Mandiant report, we decided to reach out and de-classify some technical details about this mysterious group that is threatening some of the largest Italian - and European - companies.
In particular, we’ll describe how the group approached the difficult task of bringing a modern cyber arsenal to multi-decade old legacy systems.
The attribution of this group to known threat actors is still smoky and far for certainty.
In fact, even if CERT-Yoroi reserved intelligence information points to old intrusions attributed to Carbanak/Anunak romainan cells dated back 2015-2016, there is still no hard evidence linking to this particular group.
Anyway, despite the unclear purposes of their recent intrusion reported by Mandiant one thing is pretty clear: the group is capable of running long lasting operations.
Operations running for years are not typical of the targeted ransomware operators afflicting thousands of companies nowadays.
Most of those intrusions last weeks or at least months for a simple reason: persistence is really risky for the intruders, too much might cost them the whole profit opportunity.
In our experience, the actor behind TH-239 was historically financially motivated and well prepared in conducting intrusions in Enterprise grade - some time legacy - environments such as old Red Hat, Solaris OS and other Linux systems as well.
A different skill set rather than most of the ransomware operators which are extremely good on Microsoft Windows environments.
These much more rare abilities are typical of sophisticated groups such as those targeting high complex organizations such as Financial and Banking institutions, extremely characterized by legacy technologies, and almost unknown to most cyber criminals.
In this analysis, we want to deepen one of the post exploitation TTP used by the UNC1945 group to solve the huge problem of running modern attack tools on legacy systems.
Do to so, the group in fact is using a custom QEMU linux virtual machine instance containing all the necessary tools adopted to achieve its objective.
This way all the operating system  and dependencies issues become almost frictionless.
In particular their portable virtual arsenal is based on QEMU images and looks like this:
Let's go to analyze the various elements:
The content of the starting script is quite simple:
The bash script is quite easy.
It has the purpose to launch the QEMU emulator system: if no parameter is provided ($1), the script executes the first branch enabling port forwarding between guest 22 to host 2222, using the display library “curses”.
This setup is to interact with the VM connecting through the host 2222 .
Without any parameter, the script configures the access through the usage of SSH, because the “curses” library is not listed and the VNC server is disabled.
However, both the branches allow communication through the SSH protocol, in the first case starting the communication at the port 2222, in the second at the port 19227.
After the first overview of the configuration of the QEMU environment, we decided to deepen into the Virtual Machine by executing it.
Starting the QEMU system, we obtained the first screen of the configuration of the QEMU system.
The specific linux distribution adopted by the attackers is Tinycore Linux 7.2, a lightweight distro running on a 4.2.9 Linux kernel.
It is interesting to notice that the Tiny Core 7.2 release is about 4 years old, but we have evidence it was still part of their cyber-arsenal during 2020.
So, we can hypothesize that the creation and the configuration of the virtual QEMU environment is 2016 and the threat actor continues to use that since that period, and, thus, that the group is using this technique at least from 2016.
Navigating the filesystem, we discovered a huge amount of tools for exploitation, privilege escalation, lateral movement and exfiltration.
Navigating all the filesystem and dissecting every malicious capability have been a challenging activity because we had to explore an entire modular VM with such many interesting artifacts.
So, we started to see which are the users contained inside the “/etc/passwd” file.
The default user of the TinyCore Linux distribution is “tc” was configured with password “ ” (empty space) and it is the user basically adopted by the attackers.
The confirmation of this hypothesis is inside “/etc/fstab” configuration file where the user “tc” has three entries, as we can see below:
This mode of adding devices onto the virtual system is provided thanks to the command line of QEMU hypervisor application though the command “-append” which has the purpose of appending a new virtual disk to the basic core of the linux system.
Inside the virtual disk there is the complete post-exploitation arsenal adopted by this new powerful threat actor and this particular configuration enables it to perform a completely modular arsenal.
In fact, the attackers could update only the virtual device letting the core of the VM unaltered by simply replacing the virtual QCOW2 disk.
The three most important directories are “deploy”, “python” and “responder”.
This directory contains many tools part of the cyber arsenal.
It is composed of many types of executable binaries, scripts and archives such as .py, .exe, .txz, or .js.
This is an indication that the repository is virtual-arsenal was originally designed to target different kind of machines, as needed.
Many of the sub-folder in this directory references known tools, most of them publicly available.
custom screen capture tool dynamics
snippet from the customized TSHD backdoor for Windows
There are also some tools statically compiled such as winexe.
The reason is to have tools that are self-contained and ready to execute and does not require any additional installations on the target machine.
This directory is quite different from the previous one.
It contains various exploits mainly written in python language.
The first folder contains exploits for the well known MS17-010 vulnerability also known as the EternalBlue family.
The code has been forked form the open source github repository MS17-010 and contains python scripts to conduct EternalBlue, EternalChampion, EternalSynergy, EternalRomance attacks, along with old Windows 2000 exploits.
Inside the “python” directory, we also noticed the “pip-selfcheck.json” file, an installation artifact reporting the latest update of the cyber-arsenal dates back to 2018 as shown below:
Inside the “example” sub-folder there are many reconnaissance tools able to gather technical information from the target systems via SMB, WMI, ActiveDirectory, System registry, NFS, Netbios and so on.
Tools really useful to gather information about the Microsoft Windows perimeter of the victim network.
The tools in the “examples” folder are actually borrowed from the “Impacket” open source collection available on github.
This folder hosts the homonymous “Responder” tool.
Responder is a LLMNR/NBT-NS/mDNS Poisoner written by Laurent Gaffie, and is able to listens on the wire for NetBIOS Name Service (NetBIOS) and Link-Local Multicast Name Resolution (LLMNR) broadcast and multicast requests for hostnames from other machines in the local subnet”.
Executed with the right parameters is able to snoop on NetBios and LLMNR in order to steal  NTLMv1/v2 password hash.
The presence of this type of tool inside the cyber arsenal of the attacker means the threat group is really dangerous: man in the middle attacks across the company network are part of their modus operandi so their intrusions could be really dangerous in poorly segregated networks.
Anyway, the 2.3 version of the Responder toolkit dates back to 2016, suggesting this tool was one of the first tools installed on the virtual-arsenal.
Inside the "Responder" directory there is also the "log" folder created during the first execution of the tool.
After the analysis, we identified all the tools stored inside the malicious virtual machine and we are able to classify them into the following categories:
All of them are compiled in different ways (static or dynamic) and written in different languages (javascript, assembly, python etc.).
This TTP confirms that the QEMU virtual machine is a complete medium of post-exploitation framework, which could be customized according to every need coming from the attacker.
If we think about the classic Lockheed Martin Cyber Kill Chain, we can collocate the Virtual Machine role in its mid and latest phase, the “Lateral Movements” and the “Action and Objectives”.
In fact, the QEMU virtual machine was manually controlled through an SSH tunnel by the attackers, and it has been used as a powerful framework.
This QEMU based virtual arsenal is not the only tool in the satchel of this blurred threat actor.
They are also able to leverage 0Day exploits - such as the CVE-2020-14871 described in Early Warning bulletin N031120 - and to leverage completely custom implants and tools to get in and move laterally even in the most segregated network.
Also, the pivoting abilities of the group are really notable and the customization of the thsd backdoor observed in the virtual-arsenal is just one element of their modus operandi.
Follow-up reports will better describe how these actors have leveraged their edge abilities to  threaten even the most cyber-mature companies.
This blog post was authored by Luigi Martire, Antonio Pirozzi and Luca Mella of Yoroi Malware ZLAB
