Cameron Camp just blogged about the announcement that Google is going to delete all private profiles at the end of July.
This really wouldn’t be a big issue if it wasn’t for the fact that Google is as two faced as you get on privacy and has a history of neglecting user privacy, such as
Cameron Camp just blogged about the announcement that Google is going to delete all private profiles at the end of July.
This really wouldn’t be a big issue if it wasn’t for the fact that Google is as two faced as you get on privacy and has a history of neglecting user privacy, such as when they launched Buzz and exposed the contacts of people who were unfortunate enough to have a public profile.
That’s the clincher… you must have a profile to use certain Google services, but you were able to keep the profile private.
The decision by Google to expose contacts without notification or consent does not appear to be an accident.
Google apologized for causing users concern, but not for exposing the contacts.
In fact, due to a settlement with the Federal government Google has apologized again, but not surprisingly, in vague language.
The apology posted on March 30th says “We’d like to apologize again for the mistakes we made with Buzz.” But still does not call exposing private contacts a mistake.
You would think that the company who produces one of the top sets of communications products in the world could communicate, but that seems a bit beyond the grasp of Google.
In fact Google seems to be trying to hide the fact that they are going to be deleting private profiles.
Google owns Gmail, but have you received anything in your Gmail inbox about the change?
I know I haven’t.
You might expect Google to know a thing or two about SEO, but if you search for “Google to delete private profiles” you will have to do a lot of digging to find the news from Google themselves.
If you look at the Google “Privacy Center” the double-speak is alarming
Do you see a problem with this?
We have five privacy principles that describe how we approach privacy and user information across all of our products:
1 Use information to provide our users with valuable products and services.
2 Develop products that reflect strong privacy standards and practices.
3 Make the collection of personal information transparent.
4 Give users meaningful choices to protect their privacy.
