Some of my favourite blog comments of the week: I’m surprised just how so many fish pedicure spas have sprung up in the uk without looking fully at the possible health risks to clients, or insuring against them.
Yes, I've often thought the same thing, especially in the context of disclosure ethics and the issue
Some of my favourite blog comments of the week:
I’m surprised just how so many fish pedicure spas have sprung up in the uk without looking fully at the possible health risks to clients, or insuring against them.
Yes, I've often thought the same thing, especially in the context of disclosure ethics and the issue of hacking medical devices.
(Believe it or not, this is a real issue, though I'm not sure that insurance is the full answer to it: in any case, this is not an advertising agency.
Hm.
I wonder if we could start charging for comments that use us as an advertising medium?)
*plonk*
Do you have a spam issue on this website; I also am a blogger, and I was wondering your scenario; we have produced some great strategies and were looking to exchange options with other folks, be certain to shoot me an e-mail if planning to pursue.
Yes, we do have a spam issue.
Would you believe that some people actually try to flood us with irrelevant comments in the hope of attracting netbook buyers to their site?
(Since the URL was stripped, I've no way of telling whether it's a retail site or what.)
I will certainly be following that up with Mr. hp mini 210 (or is that Ms hp mini 210?).
I wonder if that is one of the recommendations you promised in earlier comment spam?
I simply state you produce several outstanding ideas and I will post a number of recommendations to add in soon.
*plonk*
Still, nothing beats the warm comforting feeling of praise from a spammer.
Hey there, Have been searching for a website like this for some time.
I have bookmarked your site and will be coming back soon to be updated of what's going on.
Travel, cheap airfares, discount
It's a pity we stripped the URL for that: I could do with a holiday from all this.
*plonk*
