[Some text removed as it no longer made sense because of references to content on other sites which is no longer available – DH, 2017] A couple of years ago I blogged about the Julie Amero case http://www.eset.com/threat-center/blog/?p=42.
There is finally closure in this case.
In the state of Connecticut and innocent person proclaiming their
[Some text removed as it no longer made sense because of references to content on other sites which is no longer available – DH, 2017]
A couple of years ago I blogged about the Julie Amero case http://www.eset.com/threat-center/blog/?p=42.
There is finally closure in this case.
In the state of Connecticut and innocent person proclaiming their innocence is called “Disorderly Conduct”, so Julie accepted a plea bargain and was forced to pay a $100 fine for being a victim of adware/spyware.
It is simply how the state of Connecticut has chosen to deal with victims of spyware/adware.
It is reckless and irresponsible and smacks of wanton and unchecked ambition by at least one policeman in Norwich Connecticut, the prosecutor in the case, and the original trial judge who was begrudgingly forced to dismiss the results of the trial.
That the state even forced a misdemeanor is obviously a travesty of justice.
I am happy that the worst of the charges were dropped.
It is disappointing that the State of Connecticut is satisfied with blatant injustice though.
According to an article at DownloadSquad (no longer available):
“In the State of Connecticut, the Governor does not have the authority to grant a pardon as this authority is given to the Board of Pardon and Paroles, if you have any questions regarding the pardon process in the State of Connecticut, I would suggest you contact this agency directly at (203) 805-6605.”
Connecticut Board of Pardon and Parole (203) 805-6605
Chairman Gregory Everett Rowland Government Center 55 West Main Street, Suite 520 Waterbury, Connecticut 06702
You can email Chairman Gregory Everett at greg.everett@po.state.ct.us
Perhaps it is time to finish off, as much as possible, the last vestiges of the injustice served in the Amero case.
