A hi-tech spoofing attack took “remote control” of a 213-foot yacht – steering it off course, without anyone touching the steering wheel.
A hi-tech GPS spoofing attack took “remote control” of a 213-foot, $80 million superyacht – steering it off course, without anyone touching the steering wheel.
The ship’s systems gave no sign that anything was amiss.
All that was required was a suitcase-sized device in the yacht’s rigging.
Researchers led by Todd Humphreys of Cockrell University were able to “steer” a yacht off course by broadcasting fake GPS traffic from the upper deck – successfully fooling the ship’s systems so that anyone at the controls would have seen it travelling a straight line.
The vessel’s wake, meanwhile showed it was steering in a curve.
The researchers were invited on board a yacht, the White Rose of Drachs, travelling from Monaco to Rhodes, Greece – about 30 miles off the coast of Italy, and in international waters.
The researchers’ device – a blue box – broadcast its own civil GPS traffic until it overwhelmed the “real” GPS signals received by the ship.
If GPS systems are blocked or jammed, onboard systems will register
A researcher uses the spoofing device
The “GPS spoofing” device showed how the systems can be overwhelmed by false signals – without onboard sensors identifying the threat.
A series of “location discrepancies”, broadcast to the ship’s two GPS antenna, slowly “nudged” the ship onto a new course.
“The ship actually turned and we could all feel it, but the chart display and the crew saw only a straight line,” Humphreys said.
“With 90 percent of the world’s freight moving across the seas and a great deal of the world’s human transportation going across the skies, we have to gain a better understanding of the broader implications of GPS spoofing,” Humphreys said.
“I didn’t know, until we performed this experiment, just how possible it is to spoof a marine vessel and how difficult it is to detect this attack.”
Humphreys and his colleagues believe that the experiment could have wider-reaching implications for transport as a whole.
