The waterproof metal-fabric pocket ensures users cannot be tracked or contacted – offering a level of privacy that DIY alternatives such as cocktail shakers cannot match.
The “Off Pocket” security pouch offers cellphone users total protection – high-level shielding that blocks GPS signals, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and cellular networks.
The aim of the pocket is to ensure that users cannot be tracked or contacted when they are not using their phone.
The $85 water-resistant metal-fabric pouch has a shielding score of 100dB for commonly used frequencies between 800MHz and 2.4GHz – and is more secure than simply switching a cellphone off, as some handsets may still communicate while “off”, and others may not permit users to remove the battery.
Its creators are currently seeking funding via KickStarter.
“Today millions of people are tracked through their mobile devices.
It’s not just when you’re using your phone, its 24/7 everywhere you go,” the Off Pocket’s creators say via their KickStarter page.
“I began working on the Off Pocket in 2011 because I wanted more control over my privacy.
Not just to protect my data, but also to unplug once in a while.
I designed the first OFF Pocket as a permanent pocket for my pants.”
“The Off Pocket gives you the option to turn everything Off.
The OFF Pocket has been tested on all major networks, including Verizon, AT&T, T-Mobile, and Sprint.
It is compatible with mobile phone hardware including iPhones, Samsung, Motorola, Sony, BlackBerry, Nokia and all other modern phone hardware and operating systems.”
The device is the second-generation “Off Pocket” – the first sold out after a debut run in January, according to a report by TechCrunch.
The current price per pocket is $85 or more – the entry-level $75 early pledges have all gone.
The device will ship to backers in late September.
“The OFF Pocket’s New York-based creators say the pouch beats other shielding alternatives such as sticking your phone in the fridge — a la Edward Snowden — or repurposing a cocktail shaker,” TechCrunch says.
“Its creators have since been spending their time making design improvements and doing additional field testing.”
Of course, as ESET security researcher Stephen Cobb points out, you do need to take your phone out of the pocket to use it.
