Simply holding your phone a few inches from your PC to “hear” signals inaudible to humans will be enough to log in to sites and services previously protected by cumbersome two-factor systems, a new start-up claims.
Simply holding your phone a few inches from your PC will be enough to log in to sites and services previously protected by cumbersome two-factor systems, a new start-up claims.
SlickLogin uses sounds inaudible to the human ear so smartphones and PCs can “talk” – once you hold your smartphone near the PC, the machine plays a uniquely generated sound, and the SlickLogin app “hears” and deciphers it, sending a “green light” to the server that you are who you say you are.
The system uses GPS, Wi-Fi, NFC or QR codes to verify that the phone is nearby – and will “wake” the phone itself, rather than users having to launch an app.
The app’s three makers are former members of the Israeli Defense Force’s cyber security unit, and claim their method beats many current two-factor systems due to, “The seamlessness for the user.
We’re also more cost effective, because we don’t require any new hardware.”
SlickLogin launched into closed beta at Disrupt SF 2013, according to TechCrunch, and aims to work as a secondary security device (ie alongside usernames and passwords), and without the cumbersome use of RSA chips and other two-factor authenticators.
SlickLogin claims that its technology can be added easily to existing apps.
“Up to 7 different methods are used to verify the phone’s proximity to the computer.These include GPS, WiFi, Bluetooth, NFC, QR codes, and our unique technology, based on audio signals,” the company says.
“Our technology can operate both natively or in the browser – therefore, we support all smart-devices out there.
Adding SlickLogin technology to your existing mobile app takes only 5 lines of code.
Have no app?
Our default application can be redesigned to fit your brand.”
TechCrunch’s Greg Kumparak says he quizzed the three founders on security, and was told, “Everything is very heavily encrypted, so man in the middle attacks are out.
You can’t record the audio signal and just play it back later, as the audio is uniquely tied to that moment.
“You can’t just hold your phone up to someone else’s audio signal (or grab it from across the room with a directional mic) in hopes of getting logged in to their account before they do; your phone wouldn’t have their login credentials stored on it.”
Many companies are offering biometric and two-factor solutions to replace and/or augment current password systems – such as the Bionym bracelet, which uses your unique heartbeat pattern as a password.
