Launched today in London, the technology mixes biometrics and other security technologies for what its makers claim is a “transformative” solution to combating cybercrime – and which can be used for network security, banking machines and even smartphones.
A new fingerprint security system named Biocryptology has been touted as “the solution to cybercrime” and a “generational step forward” in security.
“This is the single biggest advance in identification technology since the creation of the internet,” says Klaus Zwart, CEO of the new company.
Launched today in London, the technology mixes biometrics and other security technologies for what its makers claim is a “transformative” solution to combating cybercrime – and which can be used for network security, banking machines and even smartphones.
It was demonstrated at London’s Science Museum on a payment terminal called Nexus Smartpay, according to IT Pro.
The system encrypts fingerprint data instantly, so that prints can be safely stored online and transmitted – so biocryptology sensors could be used in ATMs, at payment points, or even as passports.
The sensor used is also far higher-grade than previous models, its creators claim.
“Biocryptology also uses a UV sensor, infrared sensor and temperature sensors to look for blood flow, body temperature and pH to ensure that not only does the finger ‘look’ right, but that it is also a live finger – not a dead or a silicone replica finger,” the company says.
“A fingerprint on its own is meaningless.
If it cannot be verified as also belonging to the actual live person it is meant to belong to then it is no more secure than a password or a pin number that can be stolen and used illegally.”
The system reads “uninterruptible life signals” from the user, and combines these with encryption systems to provide a “secure gateway”, its creators say.
Klaas Zwart, Chairman of Biocryptology, said: “Biocryptology is a unique, impenetrable technology that goes beyond any security solution that exists today, including the most advanced biometric systems widely considered the most secure form of identification currently available.
Many companies are offering biometric and two-factor solutions to replace and/or augment current password systems – such as the Bionym bracelet, which uses your unique heartbeat pattern as a password.
Stephen Cobb, Security Researcher with ESET says that we may be on the verge of widespread deployment of biometrics.
Cobb says, “Successful implementation of biometrics in a segment leading product could bode well for consumer acceptance.”
“I have been a fan of biometrics as an added authentication factor ever since I first researched multi-factor and 2FA systems 20 years ago, however, user adoption is very sensitive to performance; in other words the iPhone 5S could advance biometrics, or put a whole lot of people off biometrics.”
