For many PC users USB keys must seem like a relic of a bygone age – but for security-conscious workers, keys can be a very safe place for data.
Porsche and Lacie’s new USB offers password-protected storage for sensitive files.
For many PC users USB keys must seem like a relic of a bygone age – but for security-conscious workers, keys can be a very safe place for data.
Porsche Design, of course, rarely put their name to anything that isn’t state-of-the-art – so a secure area within the new Lacie Porsche USB 3.0 key is protected by AES 256-bit encryption and password protection.
It also offers 32GB of capacity and speeds of up to 95MB/s over USB 3.0.
While passwords, AV software and updated OS offer a good level of protection, a removable, encrypted drive is a good “extra layer” of defense.
The Lacie/Porsche drive offers an encrypted area to store sensitive files.
It’s among the smallest on the market, according to Pocket-Lint, and clearly pitched at business customers.
“While on a business trip, users can conveniently access, securely store and easily share large documents or media files in seconds,” the companies said in a statement.
In a guide to keeping data safe, ESET Malware Researcher Cameron Camp writes, “ Your computer may interact with sensitive data but it does not need to store all of it right there in one place.
Consider using encrypted removable media for sensitive data and carrying that separate from the computer.
This way, if “bad things” happen, you’ll have much lower likelihood that the bad actors got off with critical information.”
The Lacie Porsche model – naturally – comes in steel with a scratchproof connector, and its creators claim, “melds design, performance and technology to give users a stylish accessory for any keychain, purse or briefcase.”
More pertinently, its makers say, “LaCie’s Private/Public software protects confidential data stored on the LaCie Porsche Design USB key.
Even in case of loss, theft or unauthorized access, files are secured with AES 256-bit encryption and password protection.
And for added accessibility and off-site backup, theLaCie Porsche Design USB key comes with one-to-one capacity of Wuala Secure Cloud Storage for one year.”
