A single email wiped $300 million off the value of an Australian mining company, after an environmental activist, Jonathan Moylan and sent a press release to media organizations.
A single email wiped $300 million off the value of an Australian mining company, after an environmental activist, Jonathan Moylan, created a “corporate email” address, used identity fraud to impersonate a press officer, and sent a press release to media organizations which suggested the company faced severe financial difficulties.
The Guardian reports that the activist sent an email from the domain, “media@anzcorporate.com” and used ANZ logos to make his fiction more convincing.
He also had access to a group of media outlet contacts, which he used to perpetrate his scam.
The release, which used the name of ANZ’s serving press officer, with a phone number directed to Moylan, was picked up by media outlets.
During trading thereafter, $300m was wiped off the mining company’s value.
Cybercriminal gangs use similar identity fraud tactics (as reported by We Live Security here) – aiming scam emails at contacts relating to news stories, in the name of real companies, in the hope of earning money.
Moylan’s lack of financial motive was a key factor in his suspended sentence, the judge said.
This summer, a similar tactic was employed against a leaked list of people who had enquired about the auction for Bitcoins from the “dark market”.
Silk Road provided a target for phishing scammers – and at least one site fell for the scam emails.
A reported 100 Bitcoins ($63,300) were stolen from Bitcoin Reserve via a fake login page which harvested email credentials, according to TechCrunch’s report.
Coindesk reports that the scam targeted individuals on a list of people who had expressed interest in the auction for Bitcoins from Silk Road.
The list was leaked after a member of the U.S.
Marshals service used CC instead of BCC on an email.
The Register reports that the country’s supreme court gave Moylan a suspended sentence, saying that despite the fact that “Some investors lost money,” the activist was “not a criminal in the classic sense.”
The attack came in the form of a release claiming that ANZ Bank had withdrawn a loan from the mining company, totalling $1.2bn, relating to an open-cut coaline.
