Modern cars are more and more dependent on computer systems.
And guess what?
They can be hacked.
When US TV correspondent Leslie Stahl drove her car around a deserted parking lot the other day, she was in for a big surprise.
First the car’s windscreen wipers and wiper fluid kicked into action, obscuring her sight.
Then the car’s horn honked loudly and incessantly.
Finally, as she drove up to a line of traffic cones she found the car would no longer brake and it smashed straight through them.
Even slamming on the brake pedal, failed to stop the car.
The reason?
Her car was under the remote control of Dan Kaufman, a researcher at the United States’ military’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), who has spent five years exploring how to hack into cars as part of a project run by its Information Innovation Office.
According to the report, all that the researcher used was a laptop that bombarded the car with commands, creating a brainstorm that allowed a potential attacker to take complete control of the car while it was on the road.
The dramatic demonstration was well-timed, as Massachusetts Senator Ed Markey has just released a report, entitled “Tracking & Hacking: Security & Privacy Gaps Put American Drivers at Risk”, that claims that many modern cars are endangering lives by exposing drivers to hacking attacks that could cause vehicles to be hijacked and crashed, and the personal information of drivers to be stolen.
Senator Markey’s report quizzed 16 major automobile manufacturers about what they were doing to better ensure the safety and privacy of drivers.
In all, 16 major automobile manufacturers answered Markey’s questions: BMW, Chrysler, Ford, General Motors, Honda, Hyundai, Jaguar Land Rover, Mazda, Mercedes-Benz, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Porsche, Subaru, Toyota, Volkswagen (with Audi), and Volvo.
Letters sent to Aston Martin, Lamborghini, and Tesla went unanswered.
As Senator Markey puts it, in a cute soundbite, “no longer do you need a crowbar in order to break into a car, now you can do it with an iPad.”
It’s not as though these safety problems weren’t already warned about.
In mid-2013, security researchers Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek showed how they could mess around with vehicle’s electronic systems including those related to braking and steering.
