OK, I bet you think I am making this up, but this is real.
The Tits alternative is a theorem by an award winning Belgian mathematician named Jacques Tits.
According to Wikipedia: “In mathematics, the Tits alternative, named for Jacques Tits, is an important theorem about the structure of finitely generated linear groups.
It states
OK, I bet you think I am making this up, but this is real.
The Tits alternative is a theorem by an award winning Belgian mathematician named Jacques Tits.
According to Wikipedia:
“In mathematics, the Tits alternative, named for Jacques Tits, is an important theorem about the structure of finitely generated linear groups.
It states that every such group is either virtually solvable (i.e.
has a solvable subgroup of finite index), or it contains a subgroup isomorphic to the free group on two generators.”
Somewhere in computer security there probably is an application for this theorem, but I became aware of its existence because of a recent internet scam.
One or more companies in Asia are trying to convince people that someone named “Jacques Tits” is trying to register their domain.
Here is the one that ESET received.
————————————————————————- From: Joyce Guo [mailto:joyce@worldwidenetwork.asia] Sent: Thursday, February 26, 2009 9:27 PM To: AskESET Subject: eset dispute of domain name Importance: High
Dear Manger, We are a professional Internet consultant organization in Asia, which mainly deal with the global companies’ domain name registration and internet intellectual property right protection.
Currently, we have a pretty important issue needing to confirm with your company.
On feb 27th, 2009, we received an application formally, one person named “Jacques Tits” wanted to applied for the Internet brand “eset” and some domain names through our body.
During our preliminary investigation,we found that these domain names’ keyword and internet brand is identical with your trademark.
I wonder whether you consigned "Jacques Tits" to register these domain names through us or not?
Or is "Jacques Tits" your business partner or distributor in Asia?
Currently, we have postponed this application of this company temporarily already.
In order to deal with this issue better, please let the principal make a confirmation with me by telephone or email ASAP.
In addition, I must state that we have time limited for one person or one company’s registration.
It is just 15 days.
If your company files doesn’t resent within the time limited.
We will unconditionally authorized the application of " Jacques Tits".
Thank you for your cooperate.
Best Regards, Joyce Guo Registration Commissioner Mail:joyce@worldwidenetwork.asia Web:www.worldwidenetwork.asia ————————————————————————-
This is a scam designed to trick businesses into registering useless domains.
The companies will charge some amount of money to allegedly help you protect your brand.
I expect more companies throughout the world to adopt this tactic.
If you get such an email it is best to simply delete it and ignore it.
