The new Windows 10 update doesn’t offer any detail as to what it fixes or improves, leaving many to question why the tech giant has been so vague.
Since launching Windows 10 across the globe last month, Microsoft has issued two cumulative updates.
The most recent, issued on 14th August, offers users little by way of detail as to what impact this will have.
This ambiguity has been questioned by commentators and news providers, with The Register, for example, querying the tech giant’s silence on the matter.
On announcing the update, Microsoft simply stated: “This update includes improvements to enhance the functionality of Windows 10.”
It added that since all updates to its latest operating system are cumulative, the latest package is inclusive of previously released fixes, including the one issued a few days earlier.
While this update outlined the reasons behind the patch – to boost functionality and address security vulnerabilities – the most recent modifications have not been explained.
When The Register pressed Microsoft to explain why, it said that it only explained notable updates to Windows 10.
“As we have done in the past, we post KB [knowledge base] articles relevant to most updates which we’ll deliver with Windows as a Service,” a spokesperson told the online news provider.
“Depending on the significance of the update and if it is bringing new functionality to Windows customers, we may choose to do additional promotion of new features as we deploy them.”
For a new update to occur so soon after another was issued suggests that the initial patch was not as comprehensive as it should have been or that its team had overlooked glitches and further vulnerabilities to Windows 10.
Nevertheless, Windows 10 has been largely well-received, but given that it represents a significant departure from past practice – Windows as a Service, for example – there has also been much discussion about security and privacy concerns.
What is certain is that both security and privacy is of paramount concern to the tech giant.
