Here are one or two resources some of you might find useful and interesting.
Infragard and the Center for Information Security Awareness have a Security Awareness in the Workplace program that looks worth a closer look.
It consists of 14 separate lessons addressing key information security issues “that can impact in the workplace”.
The free lessons
Here are one or two resources some of you might find useful and interesting.
Infragard and the Center for Information Security Awareness have a Security Awareness in the Workplace program that looks worth a closer look.
It consists of 14 separate lessons addressing key information security issues “that can impact in the workplace”.
The free lessons are presented as web-based Flash movies.
People who complete the course can also register to be examined for a certificate.
This isn’t free, but a nominal $24.95 doesn’t sound unreasonable.
It ain’t CISSP or a GIAC qualification, but as a reward for working on security awareness, it might be a good investment.
The US-CERT Current Activity page is a regularly updated summary of high impact security incident reports.
To give you an idea of the sort of information you can find there, the current page includes:
May 29 VMware Releases Security Advisory
May 28 Microsoft Releases Security Advisory 971778
May 27 BlackBerry Security Advisory
May 26 Microsoft Releases Service Pack 2 for Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008
May 22 Novell Releases Updates for GroupWise
May 20 NSD DNS Buffer Overflow Vulnerability
May 20 Cisco Releases Security Advisory for CiscoWorks TFTP Vulnerability
May 20 Mac OS X Includes Known Vulnerable Version of Java
May 19 Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS) WebDAV Request Vulnerability
May 18 Gumblar Malware Exploit Circulating
Of course, the page gives more information than this, and includes links.
Finally, the Anti-Phishing Working Group (check the web site: some pretty useful resources there).
A project I’ve just caught on to is an education initiative called the AWPG/CMU Phishing Education Landing Page program.
The intention is to catch potential victims who’ve clicked on a known phish link by redirecting them to an informational web site.
Find out more here.
