An international effort between security organizations is needed to fight cybercrime, says the UK’s National Crime Agency.
The UK’s National Crime Agency (NCA) is keen to work more closely with security organizations around the world to tackle the global threat of cybercrime.
Speaking recently at the CLOUDSEC London 2015 conference, Oliver Gower, head of strategy, partnerships and transformation at the NCA’s National Cyber Crime Unit, said that a joint-up approach is vital.
He explained that because of the international nature of the threat – and the fact that cybercriminals pay no attention to national boundaries – it is important that the security world comes together to combat a universal menace.
The Register reported that this collective strategy will help the NCA “reach across jurisdictions, and bust underworld gangs around the planet”.
Mr Gower said that this approach should take inspiration from the so-called Five Eyes partnership between the US’ National Security Agency, the UK’s Government Communications Headquarters, Canada’s Communications Security Establishment, Australia’s Australian Signals Directorate and New Zealand’s Government Communications Security Bureau.
The goal of this alliance, which emerged in the aftermath of the second world war, is to share information and intelligence on matters of security.
Mr Gower said that a collaborative approach from security professionals is necessary because managing trans-jurisdictional efforts to fight cybercrime is extremely difficult as it currently stands.
“Police investigators struggle to accept their technical limitations, and need the help of talented information security types to keep up with progress,” the online news provider reported.
“Deconfliction between different police forces is increasingly an issue for crime-busting coalitions, too.
“The possibility of undercover cybercops having their investigations blown by blue-on-blue bungling – an officer in one country interrupting and scuppering the work of another – is increasingly an issue.”
In related news, the NCA’s website was recently attacked, with the Lizard Squad claiming responsibility.
