Apple has announced that iOS 9 will launch on September 16th.
The updated operating system will have even greater security features, including a stronger passcode and improved 2FA.
The latest edition of Apple’s mobile operating system comes with enhanced security features, the company has announced.
Available from September 16th on the iPhone, iPad and iPod, iOS 9 offers users even greater protection from a variety of threats, and ensures that personal information and sensitive data remains secure.
After the iCloud scandal from last year, which saw attackers leak nude photos of celebrities, Apple has been eager to restore its security credibility.
Two key developments will offer users even greater reassurance that this is the case.
This includes a stronger passcode and a revamped two-factor authentication process (2FA).
By building the latter directly into the operating system, the tech giant has made it markedly more difficult for attackers “to gain unauthorized access” to a user’s Apple ID.
2FA is a supplementary security feature.
For example, it ensures that devices remain secure even after a cybercriminal has managed to get hold of a password – another process is still required to gain access.
“Your Apple ID is the key to many things you do with Apple,” the company has explained.
“Two-step verification is a feature you can use to keep your Apple ID and personal information as secure as possible.”
The iOS update was announced at Apple’s latest and highly anticipated Keynote event in San Francisco, which saw the tech giant also announce the latest edition to the iPad family, the iPad Pro.
Now the largest device in the series (it has a 12.9-inch display), the hi-tech iPad Pro comes with Touch ID technology to help keep the device safe and secure.
According to Apple, this helps to transform “your fingerprint into an unforgettable password”, meaning that when this feature is activated, it cannot be unlocked by anyone else.
Against the backdrop of the Keynote event, Apple has hit the headlines over its commitment to protecting user data.
The New York Times reported that the tech giant is unwilling to bow down to government pressure to hand over personal information sent via iMessage.
“In an investigation involving guns and drugs, the Justice Department obtained a court order this summer demanding that Apple turn over, in real time, text messages between suspects using iPhones,” the news provider outlined.
In response, Apple said that it was unable to do this because its messaging service is encrypted – it cannot “comply” with this request.
Simply put, due to the unique design of iMessage – and FaceTime – it is impossible for Apple to make sense of the data that is being sent between devices.
Further, as it states online, this is something that it is keen to avoid.
Apple wants this information to remain private:
