Edward Snowden has been described as a “international human rights defender” by the European Parliament, which has called on all EU member states to back the whistleblower.
The European Parliament has voted in favour of a resolution that calls on all EU member states to “drop any criminal charges against Edward Snowden, grant him protection and consequently prevent extradition or rendition by third parties”.
Mr. Snowden, who was described by the parliament as an “international human rights defender”, described the announcement as a “game-changer” on Twitter.
He added that this “is not a blow against the US government, but an open hand extended by friends”.
Hearing reports EU just voted 285-281, overcoming huge pressure, to cancel all charges against me and prevent extradition.
Game-changer.
— Edward Snowden (@Snowden) October 29, 2015
This is not a blow against the US Government, but an open hand extended by friends.
It is a chance to move forward.
pic.twitter.com/fBs5H32wyD
— Edward Snowden (@Snowden) October 29, 2015
While still clearly a divisive issue – the motion was only narrowly passed by 285-281 votes – the ruling in support of the former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor is a huge blow to officials in the US, where he remains a wanted man (for the theft of government property).
Mr. Snowden is currently living in exile in an undisclosed location in Russia.
He arrived there in June 2013 via Hong Kong, having fled to the city after leaking details of secret mass surveillance by US intelligence agencies to the Guardian and the Washington Post.
Originally granted asylum for 12 months in 2013, he was subsequently offered a three year residency in the country when his 12-month sojourn expired.
This deal also allows him a certain level of freedom to travel abroad.
The White House, unsurprisingly, was critical of the decision, with Ned Price, spokesperson and senior director of the National Security Council, stating unequivocally that it’s position on the matter “has not changed”.
He said: “Mr.
Snowden is accused of leaking classified information and faces felony charges here in the United States.
As such, he should be returned to the US as soon as possible, where he will be accorded full due process.”
