ESET’s Trends for 2016: (In)Security Everywhere report includes a review of the most important events of last year and outlines trends in cybercriminal activity and cyberthreats for 2016.
It’s clear now that with ongoing advances in technology and the rapid growth in the number of devices that connect to the internet, more and more people are at risk of experiencing or being targeted by a cyberattack.
The same applies to all types of businesses, industries and sectors.
Consequently, security is no longer a concern for a small number of people – increasingly it is something that we all have to think about.
This development is discussed in our Trends for 2016: (In)Security Everywhere report, which has been produced by ESET’s Research Laboratories.
As it does every year, the paper includes a review of the most important events of the past 12 months and outlines trends in cybercriminal activity and cyberthreats for the upcoming year.
The researchers’ predictions, which are based on their constant monitoring of the security landscape and its subsequent analysis, range from the mundane to the most complex matters.
“Taking into account discussion and examination of what has happened in technology, it is difficult to sum up everything in one phrase,” the authors state in the introduction.
“New technologies, attack reports, new malware families, and security flaws with a global impact: the speed at which these follow one another makes security an increasingly important challenge for businesses, enterprises, governments and users around the world.”
The topics covered in the Trends for 2016: (In)Security Everywhere report include:
The Internet of Things (IoT) and the interconnectivity of all things, which highlights the importance of securing devices like wearables before being connected
The evolution of ransomware, which has changed its focus from blocking files to attacking complete devices
Targeted attacks and cyberespionage as potential ‘weapons of the future’
Globalization of crimeware and massive campaigns, with the fight against cybercrime as a key element
Haxposure, the risk of corporate data exposure and its implications
The next steps in mobile security and future defense strategies
The new security and privacy features of Windows 10
Critical infrastructures with exposed systems, and industries – such as healthcare – becoming the targets of attacks
Personal data protection laws from around the world and the need for joint efforts among governments, companies and users
The landscape of cyberthreats to children and young people on the web: sexting, grooming and cyberbullying
All in all, the number of devices and technologies keeps growing as well as the challenges people face to keep their information secure.
Therefore, it is important to emphasize the role of governments and security agencies to enact laws that support the safe and secure development of new technologies, by defining standards and rules to respect privacy, and by developing effective critical infrastructure.
