The FBI has published a list of tips to reduce the chance of ransomware being the ruin of your company – and is keen that you don’t pay the extortionists.
The roll call of organisations hit by ransomware attacks is depressingly long – hospitals, government departments, school districts, banks, businesses small and large… even law enforcement agencies haven’t been able to avoid attacks from what is becoming one of the biggest threats of 2016.
The ransomware attacks are particularly damaging, of course, because of their payload – encrypting valuable data files and refusing to unlock them unless a ransom demand is met.
The threat of ransomware is well explained in this ESET video:
If your company is unfortunate enough to be hit by a successful ransomware attack, and you didn’t take sufficient precautions to ensure that your backups are not also corrupted (or worse, if you didn’t have any backup at all) then your organisation may be facing a catastrophic situation.
Similarly, if you’re a home user who has their personal computer struck by ransomware, you may find that files which you consider to be priceless emotionally (such a family photos and movies) may be at risk of being lost forever.
It is this, of course, that the criminal gangs behind ransomware attacks are banking on.
That you will be so concerned that your company will not be able to do business without access to its data, or that you will be forever sobbing into your cornflakes at the loss of photos of sentimental value, that you will be prepared to swallow the pill and be prepared to pay the extortionists.
Ransomware is not only on the rise, judging by the number of attacks being reported and the number of new samples being seen in ESET’s labs, but is also becoming more sophisticated and aggressive.
Modern ransomware is not just being spread via malicious emails, but also taking advantage of exploit kits and malvertising campaigns to infect unwary computer users as they visit legitimate websites.
Fortunately, although many ransomware attacks are becomingly more sophisticated, there are also signs that the perpetrators are sometimes not immune from making mistakes themselves.
But if ransomware does manage to encrypt your files, and you cannot access working backups your data, what should you do?
