Welcome to this week’s security review, which includes an in-depth discussion of the most common reasons for corporate data loss.
Welcome to this week’s security review, which includes an in-depth discussion of the most common reasons for corporate data loss.
Also this week, we’ve got news of improvements to Google’s two-step verification process, a major data breach at Acer and yet another phishing scam targeting Apple customers.
The 5 most common reasons for corporate data loss
ESET’s Josep Albors discussed in detail some of the main reasons behind corporate data loss, with undetected drives and damaged devices – dropped from a height – cited as two of the most common factors.
He said: “Faced with such incidents, which can put companies in a serious predicament if they do not respond in the right way, the best solution is prevention and having sufficient measures in place to recover the affected data as quickly as possible.”
Google makes two-step verification easier
Google has announced that its two-step verification process is now much easier to use.
The tech giant explained that its users will now receive a notification on their device asking if they are attempting to sign in.
All they have to do is tap ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Easy to set up, this is a simple but highly effective additional layer of security.
Cyberattacks should be included in international humanitarian law
A new report from the Global Commission on Internet Governance has said that such is the seriousness of cyberattacks that they should be included in international humanitarian law.
According to the authors of the report, such is the interconnectedness of “devices and economies” that the potential fallout from a government-initiated cyberattack could be huge.
Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg ‘tapes over webcam’
A celebratory picture from Mark Zuckerberg marking Instagram’s latest milestone – it now has over 500 million monthly active users – was the topic of conversation for altogether unintended reasons.
His Facebook post seemed to reveal that he is extremely cautious when it comes to security and privacy – a laptop nearby, assumed to be his, had tape over it.
Acer experiences major data breach Another day, another major data breach.
This time it was reported that Acer was the latest victim, after news outlets uncovered that the tech company had submitted a ‘breach notification sample’ to the Office of the Attorney General in California.
It is believed that up to 34,500 of its customers have been affected.
Scammers claim there is a virus in Apple’s iTunes database
Cybercriminals are once again targeting Apple customers in their attempt to hijack accounts and steal payment information.
