The majority of IT professionals say they are not confident in their ability to keep their organization’s data secure following a breach, a Gemalto study has found.
The majority of IT professionals say they are not confident in their ability to keep their organization’s data secure following a breach, a Gemalto study has found.
At a time when one-third of organizations have experienced a data breach in the last 12 months, and more than 3.9 billion data records have been lost or stolen since 2013, the report’s findings will be a cause for some concern.
In a survey of 1,100 IT decision makers around the world, 61% said their perimeter security systems – including firewall, AV and content filtering – were “very effective” at keeping unauthorized users out of their network.
However, 69% said they are not confident their organization’s data would be secure if their perimeter security were breached.
Worryingly, as many as 66% of IT professionals say that unauthorized users can access their networks, and 16% believe unauthorized users have access to their entire networks.
“This research shows that there is indeed a big divide between perception and reality when it comes to the effectiveness of perimeter security,” said Jason Hart, vice president and chief technology officer for data protection at Gemalto.
“The days of breach prevention are over, yet many IT organizations continue to rely on perimeter security as the foundation of their security strategies.
The new reality is that IT professionals need to shift their mindset from breach prevention to breach acceptance and focus more on securing the breach by protecting the data itself and the users accessing the data.”
The heavy reliance on perimeter security systems also neglects the possibility of data leaks occurring from inside an organization.
One recent survey suggested that the greatest threat posed to a business’ cybersecurity program are employees.
This 2015 paper, by Nuix, reported that the overwhelming majority of respondents (93%) consider “human behavior” to be the number one threat to their security.
