As you company grows globally you will be faced with many challenges and it can be easy to forget, unintentionally, some of the steps you have gone through to get to the position your company finds itself in.
If you are a business owner and are lucky enough to find your business growing globally you will know that it is both an exciting time, and probably a slightly scary time, for you and your business.
While this is a perfectly normal set of emotions to experience, Canadian Small and Medium Businesses (SMBs) can help themselves by researching about tech legislation.
In particular, it is important that they pay close attention to compliance as this is commonly overlooked by many SMBs who are looking to grow globally.
For Canadian SMBs this means they need to follow compliance standards like The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA).
These guidelines will set you on the right path, with the standard of practices and procedures for managing customer data clearly outlined.
ESET’s brand ambassador in Canada, Marc Saltzman explains: “As your company grows globally, it is imperative to be set up to easily share and access information.
Build flexibility and global scale with tools that enable real time communication and collaboration”.
As your company grows globally you will be faced with many challenges and it can be easy to forget, unintentionally, some of the steps you have gone through to get to the position your company finds itself in.
However, it is crucial that you are set up in a way that makes it easy to share and access information.
One important way to do achieve this is by building flexibility with the correct tools and so enabling real time communication.
The best way to carry this out is by utilizing technology, as it makes growing globally more attainable (and scalable) than ever.
By using guidelines such as PIPEDA, SMBs owners are helping to combat any cybersecurity issues that might arise, “be sure to also create peace of mind and proactively protect your company against undue risk like data loss.
