Thanks to everyone who reads us and voted for us!
We are beaming with pride to announce that WeLiveSecurity has won the Best Corporate Security Blog award in the 2018 edition of the European Security Blogger Awards.
The great news was announced at the security bloggers’ meetup, which was organized alongside this year’s Infosecurity Europe event in London on Tuesday night.
The winners were determined by a combination of votes from the public and votes from a panel of judges.
We’re not doing this for awards, but how could we deny that we’re delighted to receive such recognition?
Indeed, we’re pleased as punch, having been up against some tough competitors in all categories in which we were shortlisted as finalists.
Of course, we’re also sending our congratulations to the winners in all other categories.
Crucially, we know full well that we couldn’t have done it without our readers, so we owe you all a big THANK-YOU.
We can feel your support and we’re happy to see that you value our work.
Says WeLiveSecurity editor-in-chief Raphael Labaca Castro:
“It is an honor to receive this award and to be recognized by our readers as the best corporate security blog.
It pushes us forward to strive for continuous improvement.
We are not only passionate about what we do, but we are also committed to sharing it in many different languages in order to reach new people every day.”
“I want to thank all our readers for their loyalty and hope more people want to join us in this journey of helping make the world a little safer,” he adds.
You may know about it already, but let us now review quickly the story of WeLiveSecurity so far:
Coming from the brains of ESET, WeLiveSecurity has come a long way since the website was launched in English in 2013.
We are available in five languages, the site is visited by hundreds of thousands of readers every month.
WeLiveSecurity content includes videos explaining hot topics, latest news, and security podcasts.
Importantly, it publishes ESET’s award-winning research from teams across the world.
It is also a place where you can find out about scams in articles that prompt scores of additional scam reports from our dedicated readers.
