Stop us if you’ve heard this before: avoid installing apps from outside Google Play.
But what if you’re itching to battle it out in Fortnite?
First, a quick recap: Epic Games has decided to eschew distributing the Android version of its blockbuster game, Fortnite, via Google Play, instead making it available exclusively from its own website.
Epic Games CEO Tim Sweeney has said that the move reflects the company’s goal to “bring its games directly to customers”, although he also made no bones about their motivation to avoid what he called a “bad deal” served up by PC and smartphone storefronts to game developers.
What may be in store for the security of users as a result of the move?
The picture may not be pretty.
In fact, the decision immediately had many in the cybersecurity community scrambling for their keyboards to warn of risks that the move – unprecedented for such a smash-hit app – may spell for its huge player base.
And justifiably so, as the decision happens to play into the hands of crooks of various stripes, however unintentionally.
Put bluntly, it gives a field day to scammers to take aim at millions of gamers who are too thrilled (or naïve) to look out for threats.
Indeed, the game had become cybercriminal catnip even before Epic Games dropped the bombshell.
Malware slingers used the online shooter as a ploy to foist their harmful wares on legions of gamers months ago.
ESET malware researcher Lukáš Štefanko warned players on Twitter in June about malicious knock-offs of the game that sought to capitalize on its runaway success.
Frankly, scammers were never very likely to pass up the opportunity to exploit the players’ pent-up anticipation following the developer’s announcement in March that it would release the game on mobile platforms.
Millions of views on YouTube for fake “How to install Fortnite on Android” videos including links to actual APK files.
Don’t install #Fortnite for Android, it’s all fake or malicious!
Official app is not released yet.
They mostly generate revenue for developers.
pic.twitter.com/xpDcqbs3G2
— Lukas Stefanko (@LukasStefanko) June 12, 2018
Example how you can get infected by downloading #Fortnite Android app from YouTube video with 130K+ views.
This one send SMS to premium rate number and downloads another fake app.
