Firefox new Enhanced Tracking Protection (ETP) feature launched to all users of the browser to offer better privacy and protection from cryptojacking.
Protecting user’s privacy is a long-time preoccupation in IT security, and corporations are also taking action.
We saw another example this week with Firefox Version 69.0.
Since Tuesday September 3, third-party tracking cookies and cryptominers are now blocked by default for all Firefox users – on desktop as well as Android.
The feature, called Enhanced Tracking Protection (ETP), rolls out stronger privacy protections.
The Mozilla Blog explains the specificity of this feature:
The default standard setting for this feature now blocks third-party tracking cookies and cryptominers.
The optional strict setting blocks fingerprinters as well as the items blocked in the standard setting.
While the announcement is important, we should note that this feature is not exactly new from Mozilla.
It was already enable for new users since last June.
However, it is now available for all users of the open-source Web browser.
Marissa Wood, Vice President of Product at Mozilla, explains: “Currently, over 20% of Firefox users have Enhanced Tracking Protection on.
With today’s release, we expect to provide protection for 100% of ours users by default.
“
The new feature targets third-party cookies, which are usually begetting by advertising networks.
First-party cookies are not affected by this feature.
The second target of this feature is cryptojacking.
In brief, cryptojacking is the usage of a computer or device’ to mine cryptocurrency without the user’s knowledge.
Cybercriminals instigate attacks in order to hijack digital currencies, or use compromise computer resources to mine cryptocurrencies unwittingly to the legitimate users of those devices.
According to a recent survey, a third of British corporations have been hit this serious threat.
If you want to go further in protecting your privacy online, you might want to read these articles as well:
RSA 2019: Protecting your privacy in a NIST and GDPR world
An introduction to private browsing
