…but there are no conferences or exhibitions??
?
Being a regular presenter and visitor at conferences and exhibitions, it is not unusual for me to get unsolicited emails with offers to acquire the “verified” list of visitors or attendees, with function and contact details.
Even for conferences and exhibitions I do not attend and often do not even know exist!
Let’s not revisit the GDPR issues where private data has been sold, and over the last two years you must have read enough articles about GDPR non-compliance.
The phenomenon of these offerings continues during the COVID-19 period, despite conference after conference and exhibition after exhibition postponed, cancelled or going virtual.
Most likely the lists of contact details now being offered are from past events – at best from the previous year.
For example, the world’s largest mobile phone showcase, the Mobile World Congress Barcelona, better known by its abbreviation MWC, was scheduled for 24–27 February 2020.
However, on 12 February 2020 GSMA, the organizer of MWC decided to cancel the show: “With due regard to the safe and healthy environment in Barcelona and the host country today, the GSMA has cancelled MWC Barcelona 2020 because the global concern regarding the coronavirus outbreak, travel concern and other circumstances, make it impossible for the GSMA to hold the event.”
An event of this magnitude – in the last few years typically over 100,000 people attend – being cancelled for a valid reason at such a short notice creates a logistical nightmare, not only for the organizers, but also for exhibitors, presenters and delegates.
However, one thing was obvious: nobody would be there.
Nevertheless, the fine folk in the “leads” business continued as if nothing had happened: for example, nine days after the event was canceled, and just three days before its originally scheduled start, I received spam offering 95,890 lies… ummm, I mean supposed contact info, about those who would be attending.
One could still argue that – as the event had not happened yet – this was an oversight.
However, two months after the event was scheduled, and almost three months after it had been cancelled, a version of the visitors list was still offered.
Besides the “follow-up” being from someone never heard from before, the mentioned discount must also have been in the number of lies, uhhh… visitors (16,579).
InfoSec World 2020, rather than cancelling, went virtual, as seen in these tweets:
Again, despite the in-person conference being canceled, I received several offers of attendee lists.
If we look at all the different messages I received about InfoSec World 2020, some interesting artifacts are obvious:
One interesting question remaining is how these scammers and leeches – this business is clearly far from clean as it depends on sending email spam as its main sales method – obtain their information.
Besides a business where they share amongst themselves, a self-generation process, we actually give away a lot of information about ourselves.
Now I can hear many of you say: “I don’t do that!
I am careful with my details!” But all it takes for these people is an email address to start.
How many of you habitually click “Yes” to these requests from Outlook?
To be honest, one wonders why Outlook does not by default disable this feature.
First of all, it can be considered a tracking feature (invading your privacy) that you have received and/or read a message.
It also confirms to the sender that the email address is active and monitored, which may trigger more spam to come.
But it can be misleading too.
The recipient may not have read the message, is in a hurry, the above window pops up and clicks on Yes, or is typing already and hits the enter-key.
Note that the default selected answer is “Yes”.
It is not difficult at all to disable that “problem”.
For Outlook, it is done via the Options:
