ESET researchers uncover a new APT group that has been stealing sensitive documents from several governments in Eastern Europe and the Balkans since 2011
Rare is the APT group that goes largely undetected for nine years, but XDSpy is just that; a previously undocumented espionage group that has been active since 2011.
It has attracted very little public attention, with the exception of an advisory from the Belarusian CERT in February 2020.
In the interim, the group has compromised many government agencies and private companies in Eastern Europe and the Balkans.
This blogpost is a summary, with updated information about the compromise vectors and Indicators of Compromise, of research that we’ve presented at the Virus Bulletin 2020 conference (see the full paper and the presentation).
Targets of the XDSpy group are located in Eastern Europe and the Balkans and are primarily government entities, including militaries and Ministries of Foreign Affairs, and private companies.
Figure 1 shows the location of known victims according to ESET telemetry.
Figure 1.
Map of XDSpy victims according to ESET telemetry (Belarus, Moldova, Russia, Serbia and Ukraine)
After careful research, we were not able to link XDSpy to any publicly known APT group:
We did not find any code similarity with other malware families.
We did not observe any overlap in the network infrastructure.
We are not aware of another APT group targeting these specific countries and verticals.
Moreover, the group has been active for more than nine years.
So, had such an overlap existed, we believe that it would have been noticed, and the group uncovered, a long time ago.
We believe that the developers might be working in the UTC+2 or UTC+3 time zone, which is also the time zone of most of the targets.
We also noticed they were only working from Monday to Friday, suggesting a professional activity.
XDSpy operators mainly seem to use spearphishing emails in order to compromise their targets.
In fact, this is the only compromise vector that we have observed.
However, the emails tend to vary a bit: some contain an attachment while others contain a link to a malicious file.
The first layer of the malicious file or attachment is generally a ZIP or RAR archive.
Figure 2 is an example of an XDSpy spearphishing email sent in February 2020.
Figure 2.
Spearphishing email sent by XDSpy’s operators in February 2020
Roughly translated, the body of the email says:
Good afternoon!
