No, I'm not talking about a newly-discovered and virulent OS X upconversion of SevenDust or AutoStart 9805.
Mac Virus is a site founded by Susan Lesch in the 1990s, when pre-OS X Mac-specific malware was still a serious issue – AutoStart in particular caused significant damage back then – and cross-platform macro viruses were also a major
No, I'm not talking about a newly-discovered and virulent OS X upconversion of SevenDust or AutoStart 9805.
Mac Virus is a site founded by Susan Lesch in the 1990s, when pre-OS X Mac-specific malware was still a serious issue – AutoStart in particular caused significant damage back then – and cross-platform macro viruses were also a major problem.
I co-maintained it for a while, then took it over when Susan couldn't spare the time, but it became relegated to the backburner as I got tied up with a whole lot of other things.
However, I've had occasion to do a load of research recently into the Mac malware scene, both at ESET and with outside organizations, so I've taken to blogging there on a regular basis, as there isn't much in the way of independent Apple-related security sites at the moment, considering how that scene is hotting up.
I suppose I ought to call it Mac Malware or even Mac Threats (or something) rather than Mac Virus – viruses are clearly much less dominant nowadays – but the domain name is http://www.macvirus.com so I guess I'll stay with the old "brand" for now.
(No, I'm not making any money out of it!)
You can get straight to the blog page, which is its primary purpose right now, here.
That doesn't mean I won't be blogging on Mac issues here, of course.
In fact, I envisage a lot of cross references between that blog and this one, as ESET becomes more engaged with the Mac community.
In general, whether the primary home for a specific item is here or there will depend on whether I write it on ESET's time or my own, though Mac Virus posts will remain vendor-neutral.
Just to give you a flavour of what's being posted there at the moment, here are the last few blogs:
Mac Security, Windows Security is commentary on a CNET article by Elinor Mills that quoted our survey at http://www.eset.com/company/CERC_Poll_2009_Oct.pdf.
iPhone and iPod Touch News is commentary on vulnerabilities and countermeasures on those platforms
Is there such a thing as Mac malware?
comments at length on a Guardian blog by Jack Schofield.
MacKoobface points to a very nice blog by Dancho Danchev on a theme we'll also be revisiting here in the near future.
ESET is exhibiting at MacWorld 2010 in San Francisco, by the way: that's February 9th-13th: see http://www.macworldexpo.com/.
I won't be there, but I'm sure the guys who are will be pleased to talk about the Mac beta program (or pretty much anything else).
David Harley BA CISSP FBCS CITP Director of Malware Intelligence
ESET Threatblog (TinyURL with preview enabled): http://preview.tinyurl.com/esetblog ESET Threatblog notifications on Twitter: http://twitter.com/esetresearch (or http://twitter.com/ESETblog) ESET White Papers Page: http://www.eset.com/download/whitepapers.php
