Last week Al Quaeda cyberterrorism attack information was declassified and made public.
Today’s New York Times had an applicable editorial to whether cybersecurity issues are over-blown or under-believed: Predictions of disaster have always been ignored — that is why there is a Cassandra myth — but it is hard to think of a time when
Last week Al Quaeda cyberterrorism attack information was declassified and made public.
Today’s New York Times had an applicable editorial to whether cybersecurity issues are over-blown or under-believed:
Predictions of disaster have always been ignored — that is why there is a Cassandra myth — but it is hard to think of a time when so many major warned-against calamities have occurred in such quick succession.
The next time someone is inclined to hold hearings on a disaster, they should go beyond asking why particular warnings were ignored and ask why well-founded warnings are so often ignored.
The article cites Katrina, 9/11, and others.
Today we’ll try to answer whether this trend of ignoring warnings is this applicable towards warnings of Cyberwarfare.
Let’s open with this quote from PBS Frontline’s 2003 ‘Cyberwar’:
If I were establishing a terror organization today, I would be more interested in doing costly disruption by cyberspace-based means.
If I did physical destruction, I would know that I would have to deal with a bunch of angry Americans who would track me to the ends of the earth.
On the other hand, if I could engage in acts that would cause hundreds of billions of dollars worth of costly economic damage, and I could do it relatively secretly, why wouldn't I pursue that aim?
And why wouldn't that make me a great hero to the constituency I was serving, my people, those who believe as I would?
So if I were a terrorist, I would be thinking these days about mass disruption rather than mass destruction.
Here’s what the previous source, John Arquilla, one of cybersecurity’s knowledge leaders and currently a professor at Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, had to say about cyberwar nearly eighteen years ago:
Cyberwar refers to conducting, and preparing to conduct, military operations according to information-related principles.
It means disrupting if not destroying the information and communications systems, broadly defined to include even military culture, on which an adversary relies in order to “know” itself: who it is, where it is, what it can do when, why it is fighting, which threats to counter first, etc.
Cyberwar refers to conducting, and preparing to conduct, military operations according to information-related principles.
It means disrupting if not destroying the information and communications systems, broadly defined to include even military culture, on which an adversary relies in order to “know” itself: who it is, where it is, what it can do when, why it is fighting, which threats to counter first, etc.
It means trying to know all about an adversary while keeping it from knowing much about oneself.
It means turning the “balance of information and knowledge” in one’s favor, especially if the balance of forces is not.
It means using knowledge so that less capital and labor may have to be expended.
It means trying to know all about an adversary while keeping it from knowing much about oneself.
