What would happen if every single one of the four BILLION cell phones on this planet just went dark?
Or most likely, what would happen if every single cell phone went dark in one country?
One scenario is a combined DoS attack on the internet was combined with a DoS attack on the cellular phone infrastructure at the same time.
GSMWorld gave me great statistics on phone usage: as of June 2009 there were 4.3 Billion cellular users.
Imagine the number of phones matching the number of PCs under botnet control – 15% this year.
That would equal 600 million cell phones.
Now imagine 600,000,000 zombied handsets flooding emergency phone numbers as well as performing IP-based DDoS attacks.
According to Aryeh Goretsky,a twenty year malware industry veteran and one of ESET’s Distinguished Researchers I recently polled as he was walking past my desk, there are about 300 dedicated applications of cellular malware currently available.
In Moore’s Law computer age terms this would put the cellular malware penetration at roughly around the PC malware equivalent of 1992.
Some differences stand out.
In 1992 we were using the equivalent of a 286 PC, or in my case, the Commodore Amiga.
To frame market share penetration, the Apple 2c was still in use at the high school my mom taught at.
Now PCs are almost ubiquitous in schools.
Storage capacity was limited to a few Megabytes of data (40 MB external hard drive) and CD-ROMs were known as WORM drives (Write-Only, Read-Many) which could store a whopping 600MB of data.
Compare that with the capacity of the Smartphones in use today.
Blackberries with removable storage can hold 8 Giga-bytes of data.
1GB = 1000 MB.
Processor speeds on Smartphones rival those of PCs five years earlier.
And web-enabled TCP/IP traffic means a conduit for applications to virtually anywhere.
Faster CPUs and higher storage mean Smartphones are approaching the attack surface horizon.
With the critical exception of a phone having always-on connectivity.
Any time, any place.
And with Wi-Fi connectivity built into most smartphones, there is a potential infection vector for the enterprise or while just passing by.
So how big is this threat?
