Sign up or login to join the discussions!

Sean Gallagher
    -  Aug 5, 2015 7:00 pm UTC
LAS VEGAS—Today at the Black Hat information security conference, Dell SecureWorks researchers unveiled a report on a newly detected hacking group that has targeted companies around the world while stealing massive amounts of industrial data.
The majority of the targets of the hacking group were in the automotive, electronic, aerospace, energy, and pharmaceutical industries.
The group, believed to be based in China, has also targeted defense contractors, colleges and universities, law firms, and political organizations—including organizations related to Chinese minority ethnic groups.
At least 50 organizations in those industries in the US and the United Kingdom had data stolen by members of Emissary Panda.
A cultural site for the Chinese Uyghur ethnic group was also used, apparently to target members of the Muslim minority for surveillance.
No zero-day vulnerabilities were used to breach targeted networks, instead "the group relied on old vulnerabilities such as CVE-2011-3544"—a near-year-old Java security hole—"and CVE-2010-0738 to compromise their targets," Dell SecureWorks' researchers reported.
The group used a number of tools common to other Chinese hacking groups, but they had a few unique tools of their own with interfaces developed for Standard (Simplified) Chinese.
One of these is the PlugX remote access tool, "a notorious piece of malware linked to a number of attacks and to another Threat Group, which researchers believe is also likely based out of China," according to Dell SecureWorks researchers.
It also appears the group used China's Baidu search engine to perform reconnaissance on targets.
Visitors to sites exploited by Emissary Panda are directed by code embedded in the sites to a malicious webpage, which screens their IP address.
If the address falls within ranges that the attackers are interested in, the malicious site waits for their next page view to drop an exploit on the desirable target's PC.
(There has also been at least one victim targeted by a spear-phishing attack.)
A variety of malware, including the PlugX tool, was shared with other known Chinese threat groups.
Once inside networks, the group generally targeted Windows network domain controllers and Exchange e-mail servers, targeting user credentials to allow them to move to other systems throughout the targeted network.
They used an exploit of Internet Information Server to inject keylogger and backdoor malware onto the Exchange server.
You must login or create an account to comment.
Join the Ars Orbital Transmission mailing list to get weekly updates delivered to your inbox.

  CNMN Collection
  WIRED Media Group
  © 2021 Condé Nast.
Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 1/1/20) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 1/1/20) and Ars Technica Addendum (effective 8/21/2018).
Ars may earn compensation on sales from links on this site.
Read our affiliate link policy.
Your California Privacy Rights | Do Not Sell My Personal Information
  The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
