Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Bank of America insider charged with money laundering for BEC scams
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Wyckoff Heights Medical Center in Brooklyn and the University of Vermont Health Network are the latest victims of the Ryuk ransomware attack spree covering the healthcare industry across the U.S.
Yesterday, the U.S. government hosted an emergency call with stakeholders in the healthcare industry to alert them to an "increased and imminent cybercrime threat to U.S. hospitals and healthcare providers."
Later in the day, CISA issued a joint advisory publicly warning that U.S. hospitals and healthcare providers are actively targeted in cyberattacks deploying the Ryuk ransomware.
Charles Carmakal, senior vice president and CTO of Mandiant, told BleepingComputer that an Eastern European hacking group known as UNC1878 is responsible for these attacks and that they intend to attack hundreds of hospitals.
This week, Sky Lakes Medical Center in Oregon and St. Lawrence Health System in New York were hit in Ryuk ransomware attacks.
Last month, hospital operator Universal Health Services was hit by a corporate-wide Ryuk attack, which impacted over 200 medical facilities nationwide.
In a new report released today, Check Point states that they have seen a 71% increase in ransomware attacks in October targeting the U.S. healthcare sector.
If you have first-hand information about this or other unreported cyberattacks, you can confidentially contact us on Signal at +16469613731 or on Wire at @lawrenceabrams-bc.
Today, an employee of Wycoff contacted BleepingComputer and stated that their hospital suffered a Ryuk ransomware attack yesterday.
Wyckoff Heights Medical Center is a 350-bed teaching hospital located in Brooklyn, NY.
To prevent the spread of the attack to other devices, we were told that Wyckoff Hospital shut down portions of their network, but by then, it was too late, and many of the devices had been encrypted.
It is unknown if the hospital is redirecting patients to other hospitals and what impact the attack has had on patients' treatment.
BleepingComputer has reached out to Wyckoff for further comment but has not received a response.
Today, the AP reported that the University of Vermont Health Network had suffered a cyberattack affecting all the hospitals in their network to varying degrees.
"The attack has caused variable impacts at each of our affiliates.
Staff are continuing to follow well-practiced standby procedures to ensure safe patient care.
We understand the difficulty this causes for our patients and the community and apologize for the impact.
There have been some changes to patient appointments and we are attempting to reach those patients who have been affected.
We will continue to provide systems and patient service updates when they are available," read a statement from the University of Vermont Health Network.
The current status of each affected hospital is:
Alice Hyde Medical Center – Malone, NY - Maintaining all patient care services.
Central Vermont Medical Center – Berlin, VT - Maintaining all patient care services, but patients may experience delays
Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital – Plattsburgh, NY - Maintaining all patient care services, but physician practice patients may experience slight delays.
Elizabethtown Community Hospital – Elizabethtown, NY - Maintaining all patient care services.
Porter Medical Center – Middlebury, VT Maintaining all patient care services.
UVMHN Home Health and Hospice Maintaining all patient and resident care services
UVM Medical Center – Burlington, VT Rescheduling some elective procedures scheduled for Thursday, 10/29, with the hope of resuming procedures on Friday, 10/30.
The hospital network is working with the FBI and the Vermont Department of Public to investigate the attack.
"FBI Albany can confirm we are investigating a potential cyber attack at UVM Health, along with our federal, state and local partners.
This is an active investigation, and we decline to comment further at this time," the FBI told BleepingComputer in a statement.
It is unknown if Ryuk was utilized in this particular attack.
Hospitals that are forced to pay a Ryuk ransom need to be careful of using their decryptor as it is known to corrupt certain types of files.
Emsisoft is offering free ransomware recovery services to healthcare organizations during the pandemic, which include custom decryptors that fix known decryption bugs and can recover files faster than the threat actor's decryptors.
"The real benefit is in the fact that we focus on data safety first.
So our decryptors generally are more stable, are safer to use, and produce correct results," Emsisoft CTO Fabian Wosar told BleepingComputer in a conversation.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
Hive ransomware attacks Memorial Health System, steals patient data
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
