The June 2018 adversary spotlight is on MUSTANG PANDA, a China-based adversary that has demonstrated an ability to rapidly assimilate new tools and tactics into its operations, as evidenced by its use of exploit code for CVE-2017-0199 within days of its public disclosure.
In April 2017, CrowdStrike® Falcon Intelligence™ observed a previously unattributed actor group with a Chinese nexus targeting a U.S.-based think tank.
Further analysis revealed a wider campaign with unique tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs).
This adversary targets non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in general, but uses Mongolian language decoys and themes, suggesting this actor has a specific focus on gathering intelligence on Mongolia.
These campaigns involve the use of shared malware like Poison Ivy or PlugX.
Recently, Falcon Intelligence observed new activity from MUSTANG PANDA, using a unique infection chain to target likely Mongolia-based victims.
This newly observed activity uses a series of redirections and fileless, malicious implementations of legitimate tools to gain access to the targeted systems.
Additionally, MUSTANG PANDA actors reused previously-observed legitimate domains to host files.
Mustang Panda’s unique infection chain often takes the following steps:
There are no known community or industry names associated with this actor.
Curious about other nation-state adversaries?
Visit our threat actor hub to learn about the new adversaries that the CrowdStrike team discovers.
To learn more about how to incorporate intelligence on threat actors like MUSTANG PANDA into your security strategy, please visit the Falcon threat intelligence product page.
Want the insights on the latest adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs)?
Download the CrowdStrike 2020 Global Threat Report.
Sign up now to receive the latest notifications and updates from CrowdStrike.
Detect, prevent, and respond to attacks— even malware-free intrusions—at any stage, with next-generation endpoint protection.
