This will navigate you to Accenture.com Sign In page.
HADES RANSOMWARE OPERATORS CONTINUE TO PROLIFERATE ATTACKS, DEPLOYING NEW VARIANTS ALONG THE WAY.
Accenture Security – Cyber Investigations, Forensic & Response (CIFR), Accenture Cyber Threat Intelligence (ACTI)
The information outlined in this blog is based on collection from CIFR incident response engagements, threat intelligence insights, Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT), and various media and industry reports.
This is a developing story; additional technical analysis of the intrusion clusters, attacker TTPs and Indicators of Compromise (IOCs) will be released to the community in a separate blog post.
Accenture Security assesses with a moderate-to-high level of confidence that a previously reported unknown threat group is now using multiple ransomware variants in cybercrime operations that have impacted at least seven (7) victims.
Based on collection sources, the threat group has been in operations since at least December 2020 and has continued to target victims through May 2021.
Accenture Security also analyzed the group's activities in the context of attribution, victimology, and TTPs employed based on collection from industry publications, OSINT and incident response data.
Accenture Security assesses the group's operations are well underway, and their activity will likely continue to proliferate into the foreseeable future, impacting additional carefully selected victims.
Based on our collection sources, we are currently aware of at least seven (7) victims spanning multiple industry verticals.
Consistent with previous reporting, all known victims are large multi-national organizations with annual revenues exceeding $1 billion USD.
The profiles of the known victims continue to be a consistent indicator of Big Game Hunting, with target selection and deployment methods aimed toward high-value payouts.
Despite the numerous similarities in the potentially linked intrusion sets described herein, there are very few similarities between the victims themselves beyond geography.
This includes few overlaps in industry vertical, political ideology, or public status.
As previously noted, the most significant commonality between victims is that they all fall into the category of “big game ransomware targets”12, large companies with the perceived ability to pay larger ransoms demanded by the threat actors.
In all cases, the threat actors used a relatively standard toolkit with only minor variations, including but not limited to the following:
Accenture Security assesses that careful target selection and a unique approach to victim communication, combined with a “lone wolf” approach, also may explain the relatively low number of known victims since Hades was first identified publicly in December 2020.
Lone wolf ransomware groups typically operate outside of the affiliate-based model and don’t consistently participate in RaaS operations.
However, this doesn’t necessarily mean they are not a well-resourced group in and of themselves.
In addition, consistent with analysis published by SecureWorks, the ACTI team did not identify related activity on underground forums and criminal marketplaces, further supporting our assessment.
Based on updated intrusion data from incident response engagements, the operators tailor their tactics and tooling to carefully selected targets and run a more “hands on keyboard” operation to inflict maximum damage and higher payouts.
This includes multi-million-dollar (USD) ransom demands, and in at least two (2) instances, successful payment.
However, while portions of each intrusion chain may seem “novel” in nature, their approach suggests a moderate level of operational and technical sophistication, as the operators leverage a mostly standard toolkit and often use “noisy” approaches for reconnaissance.
In at least one instance, the targeted organization successfully deterred the attack before impact, so the intended action on objectives are unknown.
Initial Access
The primary methods for initial access into the victim’s network includes internet-facing systems via Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) or Virtual Private Network (VPN) using legitimate credentials, as well as SocGholish malware delivered via fake Chrome browser updates.
In addition, consistent with previous reporting, the threat actors operated out of the root of C:ProgramData where several executables tied to the intrusion set were found.
Privilege Escalation
Credential harvesting and subsequent privilege escalation achieved through the use of tooling to include mimikatz and manual enumeration of credentials found within files.
Defense Evasion
Impeding defenses was achieved through use of domain administrator credentials and includes the following:
Discovery
Observed multiple methods for internal network reconnaissance, including various reconnaissance scripts and tools such as Advanced Port Scanner used to collect network, host, and domain information.
Lateral Movement
Lateral movement accomplished via compromised accounts obtained during internal reconnaissance activities.
Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) and PSexec were also leveraged for host-to-host lateral movement.
In one incident, the threat actor installed a custom build of Chrome.exe and leveraged the native browser capabilities to manually target the victim’s cloud environments.
This activity included enumeration of high-value accounts and targeted destruction of data and backups through the cloud management console.
In addition, the attempted use of KeeThief for lateral movement was observed.
This tool is often used by threat actors to abuse credentials stored in KeePass databases.
Specifically, threat actors deployed an instance of KeeThief.ps1—an open-source PowerShell package written in 2016 designed to compromise credentials stored in memory on a system with an open KeePass database.
Command and Control
In most of the recent incidents, the threat actors utilized the ubiquitous Cobalt Strike post-exploitation framework for command and control within the impacted environments with at least two (2) external beacons per environment.
Command and control was also established using remote manipulator system 3(RMS).
Exfiltration & Impact
Prior to deploying ransomware, the unknown threat group has employed the 7zip utility to archive data that was then staged and exfiltrated to an attacker-controlled server hosted in Mega[.
]nz cloud infrastructure, leveraging the MEGAsync utility.
In addition to data theft, actors deploy ransomware with PSexec to encrypt files identified on the victim network.
The operators leverage this approach for "double-extortion" tactics.
If you have an incident or need additional information on ways to detect and respond to cyberthreats, contact a member of our CIFR team 24/7/365 by phone 888-RISK-411 or email CIFR.hotline@accenture.com
Accenture Security is a leading provider of end-to-end cybersecurity services, including advanced cyber defense, applied cybersecurity solutions and managed security operations.
We bring security innovation, coupled with global scale and a worldwide delivery capability through our network of Advanced Technology and Intelligent Operations centers.
Helped by our team of highly skilled professionals, we enable clients to innovate safely, build cyber resilience and grow with confidence.
Follow us @AccentureSecure on Twitter or visit us at www.accenture.com/security

Accenture, the Accenture logo, and other trademarks, service marks, and designs are registered or unregistered trademarks of Accenture and its subsidiaries in the United States and in foreign countries.
All trademarks are properties of their respective owners.
All materials are intended for the original recipient only.
The reproduction and distribution of this material is forbidden without express written permission from Accenture.
The opinions, statements, and assessments in this report are solely those of the individual author(s) and do not constitute legal advice, nor do they necessarily reflect the views of Accenture, its subsidiaries, or affiliates.
Given the inherent nature of threat intelligence, the content contained in this report is based on information gathered and understood at the time of its creation.
It is subject to change.
Accenture provides the information on an “as-is” basis without representation or warranty and accepts no liability for any action or failure to act taken in response to the information contained or referenced in this report.
Cyber Investigations, Forensics and Response (CIFR)
The CIFR team helps Accenture’s global clients prepare for, respond to and recover from cyber intrusions and minimize business impact.
The first name is required and cannot be empty
The last name is required and cannot be empty
This email address is already in use
This value is not valid
This value is not valid
This email address is already in use.
This value is not valid
