Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
US authorities have sentenced an Arkansas man to 33 months in prison and two years of supervised release for aiding and abetting hackers by creating and selling malware.
The man's name is Taylor Huddleston, 27, of Hot Springs, Arkansas.
The FBI arrested Huddlestone in early 2017, and Huddleston pleaded guilty in July last year.
Huddleston's case is unique because he was the first case where the author of a malware strain was arrested, despite not being accused of using the malware himself.
In the meantime, the US government is pursuing a similar case against Marcus "MalwareTech" Hutchins, the security researcher who helped stop the WannaCry ransomware outbreak, accusing him of creating the Kronos banking trojan.
According to Huddleston's position on sentencing and a statement of facts, the suspect said he did not start out his life as a software engineer with any malicious intent.
Instead, he got into software as a way to sustain himself as a teenager who lived in shabby conditions, never met his biological father, and moved countless of times during his youth.
Huddleston's first major application wasn't even malicious.
Called Net Seal, this was a program that could be used to secure applications against software piracy.
Net Seal was used with many types of applications, but it became incredibly popular with hackers, who used it to secure malware they put up for sale against scammers and crackers.
Because of his success on the malware scene, and especially Net Seal's popularity on a hacking forum known as HackForums, Huddleston began actively marketing Net Seal on that particular forum in the hopes of boosting revenue.
But as his ties to the cybercrime world deepened, so did his morals.
Huddleston advertised and sold the Nanocore RAT on HackForums under the nickname of Aeonhack from January 2014 to February 2016, when he sold both Net Seal and Nanocore to an unidentified third-party.
In his guilty plea, Huddleston admitted to knowing that some of his customers used Nanocore for malicious purposes.
Before pleading guilty, Huddleston's lawyer tried to argue that in many of reported Nanocore infections [1, 2, 3], Huddleston wasn't even aware of the attacks and that some malware distributors used cracked versions of his RAT.
Mr. Huddleston understands and accepts that he broke the law by marketing Net Seal and NanoCore on a website frequented by users who would likely use the programs for malicious purposes.
[...] Mr. Huddleston knows that he has no one to blame but himself, and is prepared to serve the sentence this Court finds appropriate.
His actions before and after his arrest illustrate his sincere remorse and dedication to using his talents to benefit society and make amends for his illegal conduct.
Huddleston now works as a carpenter, his lawyers told the court before last week's sentencing.
He also "enthusiastically" cooperated with authorities, his lawyers pointed out.
They asked for a maximum sentence of six months in prison.
He faced a maximum prison sentence of ten years, but the court decided on 33 months instead.
The FBI tracked down Huddleston during their investigation of Zachary Shames, the author of the Limitless Keylogger.
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Vidar stealer abuses Mastodon to silently get C2 configuration
Hackers use stealthy ShellClient malware on aerospace, telco firms
New UEFI bootkit used to backdoor Windows devices since 2012
Flubot Android malware now spreads via fake security updates
There are legitimate reasons for remote access tools.
Is the only difference where one advertises their software for sale?
How is Huddleston guilty while companies like Spigot are able to continue to push aggressive PUA's knowing full well their software is not obeying user commands to uninstall?
You can make a similar case against commercial spyware makers that advertise their products to couples, so they can keep an eye on their significant other... aka spouseware
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
