In a recent major update of our flagship platform, VMRay Analyzer 3.0, we made dramatic improvements in the system’s memory dumping capabilities.
In an automated approach we call smart memory dumping, VMRay Analyzer now triggers more frequent and more relevant memory dumps to capture a comprehensive view of malware characteristics and behavior.
In turn, this increases the speed and accuracy of malware analysis and detection.
For incident responders, smart memory dumping makes their jobs easier by automating many tasks that previously required manual intervention.
In addition, more frequent and relevant dumps enhance digital forensics by capturing a more complete record of artifacts created by threats and attacks.
Malware authors routinely combine multiple techniques to evade detection and analysis by layered defenses: anti-virus, static analysis, and dynamic analysis tools.
A popular approach is to compress, encrypt and/or obfuscate malicious files, making it harder and more time-consuming to identify and classify the malware—and address the threat it poses.
To do their dirty work, however, malware files need to be restored to their original state in memory so they can execute as intended.
And that creates an opportunity to detect potentially malicious behavior in the safe environment of the sandbox.
As successive layers of protection are removed—the packer layer, the compression layer, the obfuscation layer—the characteristics and behavior of malware are revealed.
For instance, memory has to be allocated to store decrypted or deobfuscated data and code.
In response to such changes, the VMRay Platform triggers a succession of memory dumps, creating snapshots of telltale information about a potential threat or attack.
Some examples of changes that trigger memory dumps:
In the screen capture above, taken from a VMRay Analyzer report on Remcos, a series of dumps is created in response to code being executed in the memory region that starts at 0x400000.
(Remcos is a remote access tool widely used for malicious purposes.)
Here’s what this high-level view shows:
With memory dumping, frequency and timing matter.
Dump too often and you’ll create more information than you need.
Dump infrequently or at the wrong times and you’ll miss information that could enhance analysis and detection, such as identifying malicious URLs or registry keys the malware is designed to access.
Smart memory dumping addresses these challenges.
In a process analogous to burst mode on a camera, triggers built into VMRay dynamically initiates a memory dump any time something changes (see Figure 2).
This screenshot of a VMRay Analyzer memory dump loaded in IDA shows details from one of the first memory dumps we saw initiated in Figure 1 when the code starting at Entry Point 0x00418340 executed.
Though not illustrated here, the importance of timely memory dumps is easily understood in the context of malware that “cleans up” by re-encrypting parts of itself that have been temporarily decrypted so they can execute.
The decrypted data may only be visible for an infinitesimal period of time, but VMRay takes a snapshot that captures it before it disappears again.
Improved memory dumping creates a more complete and detailed picture of malware activity, for example by revealing suspect code and strings associated with known signatures and malware families.
In turn, that bolsters the automated pattern-matching power of YARA rules, resulting in faster, more accurate malware classification and better detection rates.
With VMRay, security teams can utilize their own custom YARA rules along with VMRay-provided rules.
And they can more easily write new rules, for example, to automate the extraction of new C2 servers and malware samples.
Version 3.0’s enhanced memory dumping also streamlines manual analysis.
Decompressed or decrypted code that has been captured via a memory dump can be directly examined in a disassembler, such as IDA or GHIDRA.
Translating machine language into higher-level languages makes human analysis easier and eliminates the tedious process of debugging packed files.
Get-hands on with VMRay Analyzer’s enhanced memory dumping capabilities.
