The Internet Systems Consortium just released a couple of days ago a new patch (version 9.10.3-P4) to fix some issues in the most popular DNS server software in the world.
The release note is available at https://kb.isc.org/article/AA-01363/81/BIND-9.10.3-P4-Release-Notes.html
In this series of two articles, we will detail our investigation of these vulnerabilities and how we were able to protect our customers by deploying widely our detection.
ISC released a patch for the BIND rndc control channel DoS vulnerability (CVE-2016-1285).
According to ISC, this vulnerability is due to an assertion failure in the application called named when it’s handling a malformed packet received on its control channel.
rndc is the utility that is designed to control the BIND DNS server by sending requests to its control channel.
Following is an image of a normal rndc request.
As you can see, this request contains multiple records, including _auth,_ctrl and _data.
The record _auth is used to authenticate rndc client.
The sub-record hmd5 inside _auth tells the dns server to use hmac-md5 digest for authentication.
There are three sub-records nested inside _ctrl, which are _ser (serial No.
for this request),_time (current time of rndc client) and _exp (expire time for this request).
The record _data specifies the operation of this request.
In this packet, the operation field is null, which is used to initialize the connection.
The DNS server uses structure iscc_sexpr to store aforementioned records and sub-records.
The following is its definition:
Following types are defined in the code:
This vulnerability is due to lack of error checking when parsing the type element of iscc_sexpr.
By sending a crafted rndc request, an incorrect type value can be set in structure iscc_sexpr for records _auth or _ctrl, which caused an assertion failure later in named.
The following code snippets were taken from BIND version 9.10.3-P3 source code.
I added the comments to explain the code flow.
To reach this vulnerable code, the request need to be well prepared to pass several validations in named.
Following is a stack trace of named when it aborted:
Please note that authentication is NOT required to exploit this vulnerability.
From our analysis, we confirm this vulnerability could not be escalated to perform remote code execution.
Fortinet released IPS signature ISC.BIND.rndc.Control.Channel.Input.Handling.DoS to protect from this vulnerability.
Stay tuned for the next part which will describe vulnerabilities identified as CVE-2016-1286 and CVE-2016-2088.
Dehui Yin and the FortiGuard Lion Team
