In the last 3 months, we have noticed increased activity from APT36, a Pakistan-linked Cyber Threat actor.
The target this time are personnel belonging to defence organizations & other Government organizations in India.
In the recent wave of attacks, APT36 is using honey trapping technique to lure their targets.
The “honey trap” operations use fake profiles of attractive women to entice targets into opening their emails or chatting over messaging platforms, ultimately leading them into downloading malware.
Some of the attachment names that we found in the current themed attack:
When target opens such attachment, it drops MSIL based Crimson RAT which has been used by APT36 in many of their past attacks.
This RAT is used for data-stealing activities and sending them to a CnC server.
Indian Army has described ‘honey trap’ cases as a weapon of hybrid warfare being waged by the enemy across the borders.
The same theme is now being used by APT36 to lure its targets.
This campaign continues to use two separate infection chains.
These two infection techniques of APT36 have remained the same in the past couple of years.
In the first chain, a spear-phishing email has a macro loaded document as an attachment.
This document is responsible to execute a dropper module that starts the Crimson RAT tool to perform malicious activity.
In the second chain, a spear-phishing email attachment directly contains a dropper module within a zip file.
This dropper component opens a decoy document for the victim and runs Crimson RAT tool in the background to perform malicious activity.
The second infection chain is not so successful in organizations as their firewalls usually block ‘EXE’ filetype within an email.
This is the main reason, it is targeting personal accounts of individuals related to the  Indian Defence sector.
Crimson RAT remains a popular arsenal on APT36 group.
We had published details of another APT36 attack last month; working of the malware remains the same.
Summarized behaviour of this RAT-
Shown here are some functionality implementations in crimson RAT code:
It is a well-established fact, that APT36 targets defence and other critical sector organizations.
Usually, their targets are individuals and organizations which are of strategic interest to India’s western neighbour.
However, in this campaign, interestingly, some of the targeted entities belong to organizations based in the eastern states in India!
In last one year, this is the second instance where we saw APT36 targeting organizations of interest to India’s eastern neighbour
IOCs associated to the honeytrap campaign:
 
                                                            Kalpesh Mantri is currently working as a Principal Security Researcher with Quick Heal Labs.
He is currently working on hunting APTs and telemetry...
 If A New Comment Is Posted:Do Not Send Email Notifications.Send Email Notification ONLY If Someone Replies To My Comment(s).Send Email Notification Whenever A New Comment Is Posted.
Follow us for the latest updates and insights related to security for...
Viraj is a Lead Technical Writer at Quick Heal Technologies.
Sanjay Katkar is the Joint Managing Director and Chief Technology Officer of...

						© 2021 Quick Heal Technologies Ltd.						Cookie Policies
Privacy Policies
Cookies enable us to provide the best experience possible and help us understand how visitors use our website.
By browsing this website, you agree to our cookie policy.
