The actors behind Operation C-Major kept their Android malware on Google Play for months and they advertised their apps on Facebook pages which have thousands of likes from high profile targets.
By: Shawn Xing, David Sancho, Feike Hacquebord
		
			April 18, 2016
Read time:  ( words)
Last March, we reported on Operation C-Major, an active information theft campaign that was able to steal sensitive information from high profile targets in India.
The campaign was able to steal large amounts of data despite using relatively simple malware because it used clever social engineering tactics against its targets.
In this post, we will focus on the mobile part of their operation and discuss in detail several Android and BlackBerry apps they are using.
Based on our investigation, the actors behind Operation C-Major were able to keep their Android malware on Google Play for months and they advertised their apps on Facebook pages which have thousands of likes from high profile targets.
Several actors involved in Operation C-Major have been rather careless in the past, leaving behind numerous digital traces on the Internet.
One of these actors has been actively promoting StealthGenie, a spying app for Android, BlackBerry, and iPhone.
This app was marketed as a tool one can use to monitor employees, spouses, and children.
However, based on its functionalities, it is no different from malicious applications.
The Pakistani owner of StealthGenie got arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 2014 for selling spyware and was fined US$500,000.
For the C-Major actor, it was only a small step to go from promoting StealthGenie to using APT malware that was designed to spy on the armed forces of a nation.
In 2013, Operation C-Major used spying apps for BlackBerry phones, which have similar functions to that of StealthGenie’s.
It was apparent that these apps were developed not for jealous spouses but for the threat actors’ intent on stealing sensitive information from organizations like the armed forces.
Since at least early 2013, actors behind Operation C-Major have been using a variety of malicious apps against high-profile targets in the Indian military, as well as other foreign embassies.
From our research, we saw that these apps were downloaded by the hundreds, most likely by the targets in India.
Some of these apps, like fake news apps, are promoted on “official” Facebook pages, which is another social engineering trick to lure users into downloading them.
Most of these apps are developed by a Pakistani company.
Here is a rundown of what they used during the operation and how each of them functions:
This spyware collects the contact list of the targets and it can take screenshots of the targets’ phones.
It was available on Google Play in the first half of 2015 before it was removed.
Ringster appealing as a social messaging service provider
Our code analysis reveals that Ringster is reusing a lot of code from Wavecall, a communication tool developed by a company called Yello.
Ringster has a hardcoded URL pointing to mpjunkie[.]com.
This URL makes a clear connection to the other campaigns of Operation C-Major, which we described in our previous post.
SmeshApp is similar to Ringster but is more powerful.
Smesh can steal SMS messages, record videos and calls, and send screenshots.
Smesh App was available on Google Play from June 2015 till March of 2016, and has been downloaded hundreds of times before it was pulled.
This shows that Operation C-Major used relatively basic malware that remained unnoticed on the Google Play store for a large time window.
Code comparison between SmeshApp and Ringster
Since at least 2015, Operation C-Major started to use Androrat, an off-the-shelf remote administration tool for Android.
C-Major may have bought Androrat from an Indonesian vendor.
The C&C infrastructure of the Androrat samples overlaps with the infrastructure that is used in other campaigns of C-Major which we described in our previous blog post.
Three fake news apps, Indian Sena News, Bharatiya Sena News and India Defense News (IDN) were advertised on Facebook.
Prior to being closed, the IDN news Facebook page had more than 1,200 likes from Facebook members that have some relation to the India army.
Likewise, the Bharatiya Sena News page had 3,300 page likes.
These apps are capable of stealing SMS, making videos, recording calls, sending screenshots, and stealing files.
Facebook page of the fake India Defense News app
Facebook page of the fake Bharatiya Sena News app
Screenshot of Indian Sena News app
Screenshot of IDN news app
It is no surprise that the actors behind C-Major also used BlackBerry malware in their operation.
BlackBerry in general has been used a lot by government agencies, probably including the Indian military.
As mentioned earlier, the sample we found is spyware for BlackBerry that has similar to StealthGenie's capabilities.
It can exfiltrate GPS location, email address, emails, contacts, calendar data, device identifiers, and user’s stored photos.
The application also has the ability to intercept email, phone calls, MMS, and SMS messages.
As far as we know, the BlackBerry malware was never available on BlackBerry World.
Most likely social engineering would be needed to get the malware installed on victims' phones.
Though the C-Major operators don’t seem to have advanced skills, the damage they potentially have caused is significant.
Often their C&C servers live for more than a year and in some cases even several years.
They manage to keep malicious apps on Google Play for months and steal significant data from high profile targets before the apps are flagged and removed.
As we have previously noted, although C-Major didn’t use advanced malware or exploits, there is no reason why they wouldn’t continue to develop themselves to more skilled attackers in the future.
With this in mind, we will follow their future activities closely.
Trend Micro™ Mobile Security protects users’ Android devices and stops threats before they reach them.
Trend Micro Mobile Security offers protection and detects these malware using the cloud-based Smart Protection Network™ and Mobile App Reputation technology.
