Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Bank of America insider charged with money laundering for BEC scams
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The new PayloadBIN ransomware has been attributed to the Evil Corp cybercrime gang, rebranding to evade sanctions imposed by the US Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).
The Evil Corp gang, also known as Indrik Spider and the Dridex gang, started as an affiliate for the ZeuS botnet.
Over time, they formed a group that focused on distributing the banking trojan and downloader called Dridex via phishing emails.
As cybergangs started to transition to highly profitable ransomware attacks, Evil Corp launched a ransomware operation called BitPaymer, which was delivered via the Dridex malware in compromised corporate networks.
After being sanctioned by the US government in 2019, ransomware negotiation firms refused to facilitate ransom payments for Evil Corp ransomware attacks to avoid facing fines or legal action from the Treasury Department.
Evil Corp began renaming their ransomware operations to different names such as WastedLocker, Hades, and Phoenix to bypass these sanctions.
The threat actors used Phoenix in an attack on insurance firm CNA.
After breaching the Metropolitan Police Department in Washington, DC, and stealing unencrypted data, the Babuk gang said they were quitting ransomware encryption and instead focus on data theft and extortion.
At the end of May, the Babuk data leak site had a design refresh where the ransomware gang rebranded as a new group called 'payload bin,' shown below.
On Thursday, BleepingComputer found a new ransomware sample called PayloadBIN [VirusTotal] that we immediately assumed was related to the rebranding of Babuk Locker.
When installed, the ransomware will append the .PAYLOADBIN extension to encrypted files, as shown below.
Furthermore, the ransom note is named 'PAYLOADBIN-README.txt' and states that the victim's "networks is LOCKED with PAYLOADBIN ransomware."
After finding the sample, BleepingComputer thought Babuk was lying about their intentions to move away from ransomware and rebranded to a new name.
However, after analyzing the new ransomware, both Fabian Wosar of Emsisoft and Michael Gillespie of ID Ransomware confirmed that the ransomware is a rebranding of Evil Corp's previous ransomware operations.
Looks like EvilCorp is trying to pass off as Babuk this time.
As Babuk releases their PayloadBin leak portal, EvilCorp rebrands WastedLocker once again as PayloadBin in an attempt to trick victims into violating OFAC regulations.
WastedLocker -> Hades -> Phoenix -> PayloadBin, all same malware/group behind it.
Probably a few in-between don't care to recall at the moment.
While discussing why they would have impersonated another cybercrime group, Wosar felt that they saw and took an opportunity to impersonate a hacking group that is not sanctioned.
"Now they had a gang rebranding and just took the opportunity."
As the ransomware is now attributed to a sanctioned hacking group, most ransomware negotiation firms will likely not help facilitate payments for victims affected by the PayloadBIN ransomware.
Ransomware gang threatens to wipe decryption key if negotiator hired
Trucking giant Forward Air reports ransomware data breach
U.S. to sanction crypto exchanges, wallets used by ransomware
The Week in Ransomware - September 3rd 2021 - Targeting Exchange
Babuk ransomware's full source code leaked on hacker forum
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
