The activities of some non-governmental organizations (NGOs) challenge governments on politically sensitive issues such as social, humanitarian, and environmental policies.
As a result, these organizations are often exposed to increased government-directed threats aimed at monitoring their activities, discrediting their work, or stealing their intellectual property.
BRONZE PRESIDENT is a likely People's Republic of China (PRC)-based targeted cyberespionage group that uses both proprietary and publicly available tools to target NGO networks.
Secureworks® Counter Threat Unit™ (CTU) researchers have observed BRONZE PRESIDENT activity since mid-2018 but identified artifacts suggesting that the threat actors may have been conducting network intrusions as far back as 2014.
CTU™ researchers divided the threat intelligence about this threat group into two sections: strategic and tactical.
Executives can use the strategic assessment of the ongoing threat to determine how to reduce risk to their organization's mission and critical assets.
Computer network defenders can use the tactical information gathered from incident response investigations and research to reduce the time and effort associated with responding to the threat group's activities.
Analysis of a threat group's targeting, origin, and competencies can determine which organizations could be at risk.
This information can help organizations make strategic defensive decisions in relation to the BRONZE PRESIDENT threat group.
CTU researchers have observed BRONZE PRESIDENT targeting multiple NGOs.
The threat actors steal data from compromised systems over a long period of time, which likely indicates a long-term objective of monitoring the target's network.
BRONZE PRESIDENT uses custom batch scripts to collect either specific file types (including files with .pptx, .xlsx, .pdf extensions) or all files within a specific location.
CTU researchers also observed evidence that the threat actors collect credentials from high-privilege network accounts and reputationally sensitive accounts, such as social media and webmail accounts.
Additionally, CTU researchers have observed evidence of BRONZE PRESIDENT targeting political and law enforcement organizations in countries adjacent to the PRC, including Mongolia and India.
Some of the group's phishing lures suggest an interest in national security, humanitarian, and law enforcement organizations in the East, South, and Southeast Asia (see Figure 1).
These examples reveal BRONZE PRESIDENT's likely intent to conduct political espionage in other countries in addition to targeting NGOs.
August 2019 phishing lure referencing Mongolian national security topics.
It is highly likely that BRONZE PRESIDENT is based in the PRC due to the following observations:
It is likely that BRONZE PRESIDENT is sponsored or at least tolerated by the PRC government.
The threat group's systemic long-term targeting of NGO and political networks does not align with patriotic or criminal threat groups.
BRONZE PRESIDENT has deployed a variety of remote access tools.
The use of tools not previously observed by CTU researchers suggests that the group could have access to malware development capabilities.
BRONZE PRESIDENT also uses widely available or modified open-source tools, which could be a strategic effort to reduce the risk of attribution or to minimize the need for tool development resources.
Following a network compromise, the threat actors typically delete their tools and processes.
However, the group is content leaving some malware on the network, likely to provide a contingency if other access channels are removed.
When the group's activities were detected in one incident, it had elevated privileges and had maintained access to the targeted environment for several months.
This finding indicates the group's effectiveness at maintaining long-term access to a targeted network.
Incident response engagements have given CTU researchers insight into the threat group's tools and tactics.
CTU researchers and Secureworks incident responders have observed BRONZE PRESIDENT using the following tools, along with several custom batch scripts for locating and archiving specific file types:
While analyzing hosts compromised by BRONZE PRESIDENT, CTU researchers identified other malware artifacts.
Although there was no evidence of the group using the malware, the threat actors may have leveraged its access or capabilities during earlier phases of the intrusions.
The BRONZE PRESIDENT intrusions observed by CTU researchers appear to have taken place over several months or years.
China Chopper web shell files named error404.aspx included the "eval(Request.Item["|"],"unsafe");" string.
To successfully interact with the web shell, a threat actor sent HTTP requests that included the "|" parameter.
The web shell files appeared to be installed during the timeframe that BRONZE PRESIDENT was active on the system (see Figure 3).
Timeline of malicious tool use on a compromised host.
CTU researchers identified a variety of post-compromise tools stored under %AppData% (e.g., \AppData\Roaming\Temp) on several compromised systems.
The widespread proliferation and use of the following tools suggest that the group likely has the knowledge and capability to use them as part of its operations:
At the time of detection, observed BRONZE PRESIDENT incidents had likely been ongoing for several months or even years.
As a result, CTU researchers were unable to ascertain the initial access vector.
In October 2019, third-party researchers described a phishing campaign that used C2 infrastructure that CTU researchers attribute to BRONZE PRESIDENT.
This connection suggests that the group uses phishing emails with ZIP attachments that contain LNK files as an initial access vector.
During one intrusion, the threat actors gained administrator access to all systems within a targeted business unit and installed their remote access tools on 80% of the hosts.
The group installed multiple tools within the environment, including three different tools on a strategically important server, likely to provide contingency access options (see Table 1).
Remote access tools identified on infected hosts during a BRONZE PRESIDENT intrusion.
BRONZE PRESIDENT used multiple directories to install tools on compromised hosts (see Table 2).
Directories used by BRONZE PRESIDENT to execute or store tools.
During multiple intrusions, the threat actors employed various tools and techniques to understand the network environments.
For example, they used Nmap to scan various internal IP address ranges and SMB ports (see Figure 4).
They also relied on Nbtscan, net user, and ping commands to obtain insights and identify opportunities for lateral movement.
Nmap network scanning tool use via RCSession.
BRONZE PRESIDENT regularly leverages Wmiexec to move laterally.
During one intrusion, the threat actors extensively used this tool to execute WMI commands on remote hosts in the environment (see Figure 5).
Wmiexec used to execute commands on a targeted host.
They also frequently leverage net commands to connect to other hosts (see Figure 6) using compromised credentials collected during early phases of the intrusion.
BRONZE PRESIDENT Nbtscan use and net commands.
During one intrusion observed by CTU researchers, the group used the native vssadmin tool on a domain controller to create a volume shadow copy:
The threat actors retrieved the NTDS.dit file from the volume shadow copy.
NTDS.dit contains Active Directory data, including password hashes for all users on a domain.
Extracting hashes from the NTDS.dit file requires access to the SYSTEM file in the system registry:
The threat actors saved both the SYSTEM file (system.hive) and NTDS.dit in the compromised host's c:\windows\temp directory.
These files were likely exfiltrated and exploited offline to retrieve user password hashes, which could then be cracked or used to perform pass-the-hash attacks.
BRONZE PRESIDENT's C2 techniques are dictated by its remote access tools.
The group's primary and likely proprietary RCSession RAT communicates with a hard-coded C2 server using a custom protocol over TCP port 443.
After connecting to its C2 server, RCSession checks in with an encrypted beacon and then awaits instruction.
The ORat tool, which appears to be used less frequently by the group, communicates over TCP port 80 using a raw socket protocol (not HTTP).
The Cobalt Strike tool has malleable C2 profiles.
During one intrusion, it connected to multiple C2 domains on TCP port 80, including mail .
com, using the following request.
Subsequent Cobalt Strike C2 servers included subdomains of svchosts .
Some BRONZE PRESIDENT C2 domains analyzed by CTU researchers were hosted on infrastructure owned by Dutch VPS provider Host Sailor, Hong Kong-based New World Telecoms, and Malaysia-based Shinjiru Technology (see Figure 7).
The threat actors have used discrete infrastructure clusters that share matching hosting and registration characteristics.
The pattern of infrastructure hosting suggests that the group parks its domains when not in use, an operational security technique that limits exposure of the group's overall hosting infrastructure.
Hosting for a subset of BRONZE PRESIDENT C2 domains.
Some of BRONZE PRESIDENT's malware has persistence capabilities.
For example, ORat uses a WMI event consumer to maintain its presence on a compromised host.
The group also creates and maintains scheduled tasks to achieve this purpose.
Figure 8 shows a Sysdriver scheduled task that periodically executes a Cobalt Strike payload.
BRONZE PRESIDENT scheduled task created for Cobalt Strike persistence.
The threat actors tend to install malware on a large proportion of hosts during their intrusions.
However, the group exercises restraint and defensive evasion tactics to minimize opportunities for network defenders to detect or investigate its activities.
For example, the threat actors deleted volume shadow copies after using them for NTDS.dit retrieval:
Likewise, the group demonstrated diligence by killing local and remote processes after they had been used:
BRONZE PRESIDENT targets specific data types.
The threat actors use custom batch scripts to create a list of files with predefined criteria and collate the identified files into a .rar archive (see Figure 9).
CTU researchers have observed BRONZE PRESIDENT batch scripts named doc.bat, xls.bat, xlsx.bat, ppt.bat, pptx.bat, pdf.bat, and txt.bat.
Batch script (pptx.bat) used to collate and archive all .pptx files in a defined location.
The group also uses the all.bat batch script to collect all files stored on a specific user's desktop.
CTU researchers observed RCSession and Cobalt Strike on systems that BRONZE PRESIDENT targeted for data theft.
Either of these tools could have been used to exfiltrate the archived data.
BRONZE PRESIDENT has demonstrated intent to steal data from organizations using tools such as Cobalt Strike, PlugX, ORat, and RCSession.
The concurrent use of so many tools during a single intrusion suggests that the group could include threat actors with distinct tactics, roles, and tool preferences.
It is likely that BRONZE PRESIDENT has additional unobserved operational tools and capabilities.
CTU researchers recommend that organizations apply controls to mitigate common intrusion techniques and behaviors along with controls that address the tools and techniques discussed in this analysis.
The threat indicators in Table 3 are associated with BRONZE PRESIDENT threat campaigns.
Note that IP addresses can be reallocated.
The IP address and domains may contain malicious content, so consider the risks before opening them in a browser.
