BRONZE VINEWOOD (also known as APT31 and ZIRCONIUM) is a targeted threat group that has been active since at least June 2016.
There has been limited public information about the group, other than a February 2019 report describing attacks against Norwegian software provider Visma and multiple U.S. companies.
However, that report misattributes the activity to BRONZE RIVERSIDE (also known as APT10).
Secureworks® Counter Threat Unit™ (CTU) researchers assess that the group is likely based in the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
The threat actors have used a range of tools and techniques to target organizations that provide legal, consulting, and software development services.
CTU™ analysis suggests that organizations that are part of government or defense supply chains or that provide services to organizations in those verticals may be of interest to BRONZE VINEWOOD.
CTU researchers divided the threat intelligence about this threat group into two sections: strategic and tactical.
Executives can use the strategic assessment of the ongoing threat to determine how to reduce risk to their organization’s mission and critical assets.
Computer network defenders can use the tactical information gathered from incident response investigations and research to reduce the time and effort associated with responding to the threat group’s activities.
Analysis of a threat group’s targeting, origin, and competencies can determine which organizations could be at risk.
This information can help organizations make strategic defensive decisions regarding this threat.
BRONZE VINEWOOD compromises organizations that might have information of value to the PRC.
The threat group’s intelligence gathering requirements appear to include intellectual property, information that provides a commercial advantage, and details about government and defense targets.
The BRONZE VINEWOOD activity observed by CTU researchers has affected organizations in the U.S. and Europe.
The attribution of BRONZE VINEWOOD to the PRC is based on an aggregation of multiple factors:
BRONZE VINEWOOD has deployed a variety of tools across different incidents, and reported use of a zero-day exploit for the CVE-2017-0005 privilege escalation vulnerability demonstrates technical proficiency.
CTU researchers assess that the threat group’s use of available or modified open-source tools is to avoid attribution or avoid wasting development resources.
The decision to use open-source tools is an increasingly common trend among sophisticated threat actors and is often not driven by technical or resource limitations.
The threat actors also leverage popular code and file-sharing sites for their C2 domains.
This relatively uncommon technique makes detection within a busy corporate environment challenging and suggests technical proficiency and an awareness of operational security and tradecraft.
Incident response engagements have given CTU researchers insight into the threat group’s tools and tactics.
CTU researchers and Secureworks incident responders have observed BRONZE VINEWOOD using the following tools:
BRONZE VINEWOOD tailors attacks to its intended victims.
For example, the names of domains used for command and control during network intrusions have mimicked product names used by the target.
In one 2017 campaign, the threat actors targeted U.S. legal organizations via SQL injection attacks against a third-party software application predominantly used by companies in that sector.
The SQL injection string attempted to launch PowerShell via the xp_cmdshell stored procedure.
If successful, this command downloaded and executed in memory the PowerShell-Github-Shell script hosted as a seemingly innocuous file on a GitHub repository (see Figure 1).
The profile attached to the GitHub repository was created shortly before the campaign commenced.
This script can be used to enumerate system information, download files, and run commands using PowerShell or the Windows command prompt.
Injected SQL string used to download PowerShell malware from GitHub.
In other cases, the threat actors likely leveraged stolen credentials to gain initial access, sometimes through redundant remote access points that might have less monitoring than live access points.
CTU researchers suspect that the initial attack phases are preceded by careful reconnaissance of potential targets.
BRONZE VINEWOOD attempts to steal credentials and use legitimate remote access solutions and protocols, including tunneling RDP over HTTP, to access the environment.
Secureworks incident responders observed the threat actors conducting credential dumps roughly once every four weeks using Mimikatz installed on compromised domain controllers.
CTU researchers also observed this behavior from the BRONZE UNION threat group and suspect it is a conscious effort to extract credentials within the likely rolling window of an organization’s password reset policy.
In some cases, BRONZE VINEWOOD leveraged ProcDump to dump the memory space for the lsass.exe process and used another offline tool to extract the passwords.
Persistence mechanisms observed by CTU researchers include the use of Task Scheduler and Windows services to launch malware (see Figure 2) or to directly initiate outbound TCP connections (see Figure 3).
The threat group tends to use the same name (e.g., systemsvc) for all malicious services within a compromised environment, which can be a useful detection mechanism.
Task Scheduler launching legitimate Microsoft executable to side load Trochilus.
Service used to launch an outbound TCP request.
Like other targeted threats, BRONZE VINEWOOD uses a variety of native operating system and publicly available tools for network discovery and lateral movement.
For example, CTU researchers have observed the threat actors using NetSess and LG.exe for network discovery and the invoke-SMBExec PowerShell script for lateral movement.
In one incident, BRONZE VINEWOOD unsuccessfully used a compromised Kerberos ticket-granting account to cut Kerberos tickets to authenticate to network resources.
This behavior highlights the importance of double-resetting Kerberos accounts during evictions to clear old passwords.
The threat group is notable for its use of file and code-sharing sites, such as Dropbox and GitHub, for command and control of its malware.
For example, the DropboxAES RAT used content .
com, the hostname for the deprecated Dropbox API version 1, for its C2 server.
Similar to other China-based threat groups, BRONZE VINEWOOD often “parks” its C2 domains on 127.0.0.1 when not in use.
BRONZE VINEWOOD focuses on stealing data from target networks.
The threat actors collate data of interest on a central host, package the data using a compression tool such as WinRAR, and then exfiltrate the data by using the curl utility or by copying it during sessions established with stolen credentials.
CTU researchers have observed the threat actors using simple passwords such as ‘123456’ (see Figure 4) as well as more complex passwords.
Compressed archive of exfiltrated data protected with a simple password.
BRONZE VINEWOOD remains an active threat as of this publication.
Its targeting of a range of organizations suggest that the threat actors focus on data of interest rather than on specific verticals.
Organizations that provide software or other services to defense and government agencies, or organizations such as legal firms that aggregate defense and government data, are likely to be at increased risk from BRONZE VINEWOOD.
The use of fairly unsophisticated tools and techniques is likely a conscious choice.
Evidence gleaned from network intrusions demonstrates that the threat group can successfully leverage publicly available tools and use popular file and code-sharing websites to blend C2 traffic with legitimate network traffic.
The threat indicators in Table 1 are associated with BRONZE VINEWOOD activity.
Note that IP addresses can be reallocated.
The IP address and domains may contain malicious content, so consider the risks before opening them in a browser.
Insikt Group and Rapid 7.
“APT10 Targeted Norwegian MSP and US Companies in Sustained Campaign.” Recorded Future.
“’Trochilus’ RAT targets government of Myanmar.” SC Magazine.
“AD Forest Recovery - Resetting the krbtgt password.” August 8, 2018. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/identity/ad-ds/manage/ad-forest-recovery-resetting-the-krbtgt-password
“Detecting and mitigating elevation-of-privilege exploit for CVE-2017-0005.” Microsoft.
Miller-Osborn, Jen and Grunzweig, Josh.
“Trochilus and New MoonWind RATs Used In Attack Against Thai Organizations.” Unit 42.
New Jersey Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Cell.
“Trochilus.” April 12, 2017. https://www.cyber.nj.gov/threat-profiles/trojan-variants/trochilus
“A Peek into BRONZE UNION’s Toolbox.” February 27, 2019. https://www.secureworks.com/research/a-peek-into-bronze-unions-toolbox
“BRONZE VINEWOOD Uses HanaLoader to Target Government Supply Chain."
“DropboxAES Remote Access Trojan.” June 24, 2020. 
https://www.secureworks.com/research/dropboxAES-remote-access-trojan
