Real Intrusions by Real Attackers, The Truth Behind the Intrusion
Ursnif is a variant of the Gozi malware family has recently been responsible for a growing campaign targeting various entities across North America and Europe.
The campaign looks to have started around the 6th of April via a number of domains taking up residence at 8.208.90.28.
Overall 16 domains have been pointed to the IP since the start of the campaign.
As of 04/22 these actors have moved their campaign to a new IP: 47.241.106.208
The particular point of interest in this campaign is the effectiveness of the TTP’s at bypassing many security tools.
In the delivery stage the campaign uses compromised email accounts to inject into previous conversations by adding a link and imploring the recipient to check the latest update to the ongoing conversation.
The link provided is to a Google Drive account, a trusted entity to users, and often not capable of being blocked in many enterprises.
The Google Drive link downloads a password protected zip file with a javascript (JS) file inside.
Upon execution, the JS file will be executed by wscript.
Wscript then gives way to Regsrv32 which loads a txt file into memory.
The txt file however is actually a DLL file that once loaded into memory runs under the regsrv32 process.
The use of these infection methods were able to bypass several security layers including Windows Defender at the time of run but we witnessed it detect the txt DLL and eat the file on disk while missing the running executable running in memory.
While several infections witnessed during the campaign never moved past beaconing to the Ursnif C2 at 8.208.90.28 with the DLL in memory, some samples proceeded further.
For those samples the following behavior occurred.
In the registry location seen referenced below, there could be found more modules for the malware to call upon.
Initial C2 picked up on the following alerts:
With the TorClient Registry Binary being confirm for its namesake after some time:
Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Intro The Ryuk threat actors went from a phishing email to domain wide ransomware in 5 hours.
They escalated privileges using Zerologon (CVE-2020-1472), less than 2 hours after the initial … Read More
Intro The Ryuk group went from an email to domain wide ransomware in 29 hours and asked for over $6 million to unlock our systems.
They used tools such as … Read More
The threat actor logged in through RDP, attempted to run a Cobalt Strike Beacon, and then dumped memory using ProcDump and Mimikatz.
Next, they RDPed into a Domain Controller, minutes … Read More
Here’s another example of threat actors brute forcing RDP to install ransomware, this time the brute forced system was not using the default RDP port.
The threat actors installed ransomware … Read More
