MAN1 AKA Moskalvzapoe AKA TA511 are all names given to a threat actor(TA) that has been active in most major crimeware activities since at least 2014.
As more groups began pivoting to enterprise-focused ransomware activities into 2020, it caused a trend where companies began funding these e-crime groups through ransom payments, turning them into criminal organizations with funding that rivals any major security startup.
MAN1 is no exception as many researchers started to notice that Hancitor/Chanitor campaigns began leading to CobaltStrike.
In the linked sandbox report from the SANS article we can download and decode the chanitor/hancitor task listed:
The file can be decoded by using the first 8 bytes as a XOR key and then LZNT decompressing the result.
After decoding the file we are left with a packed CobaltStrike stager, these stagers are built from CobaltStrike much like the beacon files as both will share the same watermark.
After unpacking we can decode the shellcode that will be responsible for downloading the beacon file:
This stager shellcode will download and detonate the encoded beacon from:
The file is also available in the sandbox run and so we can decode the file which has a shellcode wrapper on top and then decode the CobaltStrike beacon configuration.
The watermark from the beacon also matches the shellcode from the stager executable:
Watermarks can be pivoted on by abusing the structure of the beacon configuration and known XOR keys, we take the watermark value:
We can find this value in the beacon:
Then do a VT content search based on part of the encoded data:
Which leads to a bunch of files for pivoting to.
If the CS package is shared or leaked however then it can lead you down all sorts of rabbit holes, you can use it find lots of samples and then automate decoding all the config data and compare the beacon config and templating to try to find more related files.
For now I’m interested in a sample that talks to the IP and is packed with the same packer as the previous one:
Unpacking this file gives us similar shellcode:
Same watermark, IP address and URI as the previous one but this file has an interesting ITW(In the Wild) record in VirusTotal:
The filename for artvnch.exe as a CS stager can be seen as a tasking for an Amadey bot in VirusTotal, f3823f8c3d1f3d45e1a9268df5b89f9f60fa02f8ad267e7e6b7cbff74dcaf627.
This Amadey is associated with MAN1, Version 1.43 and C2s:
We can actually find a lot of these files with the same names that are CS stagers being downloaded as tasks.
The actor(s) appear to use multiple IP addresses along this range and a few others, for example:
We can see a few things the artvnch.exe name again but also a work.exe file which is a CS stager download beacon from:
The watermark is also the same as our previously identified CS files.
This server is hosting a number of other interesting files:
The file doe_install.exe will, according to the cached sandbox report on VirusTotal, talk to another CS server:
This is an autoit compiled script that will eventually detonate two files but also perform some anti checks.
Attempts to disable or uninstall security software:
The script will also perform a request at the end which is probably for stats tracking:
Ultimately as mentioned before the script will detonate two files:
This is a packed CS stager that will download a beacon from:
Also with the same watermark as our previously identified CS related files.
The other file is a bit different.
This is a 64bit Autoit compiled executable, decompiled shows the file is simply a loader, it has the same anti checks as previously discussed but also creates a window with the title “YouWillBeMined2” which will be used as a check to see if it is already running.
The script will then download a file from an FTP server:
Judging by the checks that then happen you can speculate that this will be involved in SMB scanning for spreading:
FTP server is on same range as some of the CS boxes:
This file is a password protected self extracting rar, the password is naxui from the detonation above in the script.
After unpacking the files we are left with a bunch of files related to EternalBlue and DoublePulsar but the script above is mainly related to detonating start.exe
This file is a SFX RAR with a vbs inside of it, the VBS file just detonates another file that was unpacked:
This is a compiled python script which we can decompile:
Ultimately this script is using DoublePulsar and EternalBlue to spread the x86.dll,x64.dll,2x86.dll,2x64.dll files which turn out to be fairly simplistic downloaders:
The file will be stored in the ProgramData directory and leads to similar Autoit executables for using scaner.dat and CS stagers leading to more CS servers:
This is a CS stager using a different watermark and downloading a beacon from:
The other file we previously mentioned from 45.142.213[.
This is VegaLocker ransomware version Zeppelin, we can quickly decode all the onboard strings:
A snippet of the decoded strings:
We can continue pivoting on some of the CobaltStrike C2 servers, their admin ports are 43890 instead of the default 50050 and the cert is static:
I wrote up a tool for cert scanning ranges a number of years ago for a local conference and we can use it here to scan entire ranges looking for this actors infrastructure.
The ‘Empty’ ones are the default CS admin certification:
More pivoting on one of the CS servers ‘31.44.184.63’ has an interesting file associated with it on VirusTotal.
This file is a packed sample of Send-Safe spam bot.
Send-Safe spammer is also a known utility used by this threat group.
We’re powering the next great retail disruption.
We’re powering the next great retail disruption.
Learn more about us — https://www.linkedin.com/company/walmartglobaltech/
Malware Researcher, Crimeware Threat Intel, Reverse Engineer @Walmart
We’re powering the next great retail disruption.
Learn more about us — https://www.linkedin.com/company/walmartglobaltech/
