There is a malware with name “Andromeda”, that recently started to spread again.
Let’s listen to the experts from Trend Micro:
Hm, it is strange behavior for mass-spreading malware, isn’t it?
Someone should explain what’s really going on - and this “someone” will be me :)
Andromeda has several anti-debugging or anti-reversing tricks:
Passing all these checks makes Andromeda avoid address 0x00401E8C, where an ACCESS_VIOLATION exception would occur.
If some anti-reversing checks pass, the payload is loaded at 0x402413.
This is what the Andromeda payload header structure looks like:
This is the header of default-payload at 0x402413 address:
Andromeda uses RC4 for decryption and aPLib-library for decompression.
I made an IDAPython script that decrypts the payload and recovers the relocations and imports.
My script is based on the great kabopan scripts by Ange Albertini.
You can find my script here: https://github.com/0xEBFE/Andromeda-payload
I decrypted the payload at 0x402413 and it does several operations:
And also (sorry for the big picture, but you have to see this):
In this screenshot you can see that Andromeda:
It does not have any code to process commands from remote computer, but since standard handles (StdInput and StdOutput) are redirected to socket it’s possible to execute commands remotely.
Obviously it’s a fake payload - someone got fooled :)
Let’s check the SEH-handler of Andromeda:
As you can see Andromeda basically changes execution flow when an exception occurs at the specified address Andromeda passes the execution flow to the “load_payload”-function with address 0x00402058 as argument.
In this real payload, the malware injects itself to “msiexec.exe” or “svchost.exe”.
If you check more closely you can spot a third payload that runs in “msiexec.exe” or “svchost.exe”:
This payload contains the C&C url.
However this url is also a fake, thanks to @aaSSfxxx for pointing me out.
You might ask the question: “How do cyberterrorists test their cyberweapons if it’s not possible to run them in Virtual Machines?”.
Andromeda checks the CRC32 of the %SYSTEMDRIVE% volume name, and if equal to 0x20C7DD84 (for example “CKF81X”), the real payload is executed.
Thanks to this great forum for supplying the sample: http://www.kernelmode.info/
MD5-hash of analyzed sample: 2C1A7509B389858310FFBC72EE64D501

« How to create an anonymous IDA PRO database (.IDB)
OlympicCTF: Binathlon 400 write-up »

  Copyright © 2015 - 0xEBFE -
  Powered by Octopress
