Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
The Sundown exploit kit is a recent addition to the field of EKs [1], and analysis indicates that it is still in development by its creator [2].
As it continues to evolve and develop, Proofpoint researchers have detected it distributing a new remote access Trojan (RAT).
This campaign targeted recipients at large banks and financial services organizations.
Proofpoint researchers observed both attachments and URLs being used by the campaign; one of the more widely distributed examples employed a “breaking news” template and a malicious URL.
Figure 1: Phishing email containing “breaking news” and malicious links.
The fake news update delivered by the phishing email is false but combines sensationalism with popular suspicion of banks to effectively entice recipients to click.
However, in a departure from the targeting techniques we have described elsewhere, rather than connect to a TDS that checks for specific client attributes before pulling in the exploit kit, in this case the link connects the client directly to the Sundown EK.
Sundown does not attempt to distinguish between countries, IP addresses, companies, or other client attributes, and instead attempts to execute exploits on clients indiscriminately.
Moreover, the “unsubscribe” and “report as spam” links in the phishing message also link to the Sundown EK.
While it is not unusual to have multiple malicious URLs in a single message, the fact that these link directly to the EK, rather than to a TDS or spam site, only increases the risk posed by this message.
The exploits being served by Sundown in this campaign include the Adobe Flash zero-days that were detected on the Angler EK in early 2015 and reflect a preference for Flash player exploits and broadly applicable Windows vulnerabilities.
Adobe Flash Player through 13.0.0.262 and 14.x, 15.x, and 16.x through 16.0.0.287 on Windows and OS X and through 11.2.202.438 on Linux
Use-after-free vulnerability in Adobe Flash Player before 13.0.0.269 and 14.x through 16.x before 16.0.0.305 on Windows and OS X and before 11.2.202.442 on Linux
Double free vulnerability in Adobe Flash Player before 13.0.0.281 and 14.x through 17.x before 17.0.0.169 on Windows and OS X and before 11.2.202.457 on Linux
.dll in OLE in Microsoft Windows Server 2003 SP2, Windows Vista SP2, Windows Server 2008 SP2 and R2 SP1, Windows 7 SP1, Windows 8, Windows 8.1, Windows Server 2012 Gold and R2, and Windows RT Gold and 8.1
Microsoft Internet Explorer 6 through 9, and 10 Consumer Preview, does not properly handle objects in memory
Figure 2: Exploits observed in Sundown EK (Aditya K. Sood & Rohit Bansal [2])
The exploits observed in the Sundown EK changed significantly in a relatively short period, adding another Flash vulnerability (patched in April) and an Internet Explorer vulnerability from 2012.
These changes demonstrate that the actors behind the Sundown EK continue to adjust and refine their exploit combinations in order to achieve the best results.
The exploits are delivered in PHP and SWF files that include the code to exploit the targeted vulnerabilities.
Many of the PHP files are encoded with VBScript encoder (VBS to VBE).
The structure of exploit-serving URLs is shown below; long URL and file names are used and may differ in other samples:
One of the PHP files is a VBScript file that utilizes PowerShell to download and execute the payload using code such as:
The reliance on Powershell limits Sundown’s ability to execute on Windows XP systems – a rare break for a platform that continues to be widely used despite no longer being supported by Microsoft.
Previous analyses have observed the Sundown EK delivering the Neutrino DDoS bot.
In this campaign, Proofpoint researchers detected a new payload: the Luminosity Link remote access Trojan (RAT).
The stated purpose of LuminosityLink is ostensibly benign: "LuminosityLink allows system administrators to manage a large amount of computers concurrently.
Our product is ideal for business owners, educational institutions, and Windows system administrators.” (Fig.
Figure 3: LuminosityLink features described on product web site ([hxxps://luminosity[.
Analysis upon install, however, reveals a very aggressive key logger that injects its code in almost every running process on the computer, and multiple attempts are made if not initially successful.
This "injection" behavior is aggressive even by the standard of the Zeus family: very few malware families exhibit such an aggressive behavior, and it is particularly unusual to observe this in key loggers, even commercial ones.
We have observed LuminosityLink being used to download additional payloads.
It is possible that the actors involved here are using LuminosityLink as a platform to collect information from the victim, and using that information to decide whether to deploy more sophisticated malware at high-value targets.
While it is not unusual for adware and other questionable software to pass themselves off as legitimate tools, it is striking to see a piece of software with a set of obviously malicious functions to be marketed so actively and openly.
The recent rise of Sundown shows that the EK market continues to evolve in the void left by the collapse of the Blackhole EK, as malware creators experiment with different approaches to delivering exploits and challenge the dominance of sophisticated, high-value EKs such as Angler.
This may also be a sign that the malicious macro campaigns that have dominated the threat landscape since late 2015 are beginning to be play out and attackers are starting to look for other delivery and masking techniques: time and additional observation with tell.
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
