The Fortinet research team has been developing a industrial-grade analysis system that allows us to concentrate information from samples collected from a variety of sources.
Using this tool, we recently started to see the recurrence of URLs from the domains hopto.org and myftp.biz.
In most cases, each sample was connected to a unique URL in one of the domains, although we also found some samples that connected to the same URL.
Examples of the domains and samples collected by the team’s FortiGuard analysis system
This threat, also known as njRAT, is detected as MSIL/Bladabindi.U!tr or MSIL/Agent.LI!tr by the Fortinet AntiVirus service.
),running processes, pictures taken with the webcam, etc.
This malware family uses the .NET framework.
And this sample in particular has two important classes called kl and OK.
This class uses the functions GetAsyncKeyState, GetKeyboardLayout, GetKeyboardState, GetWindowThreadProcessId, MapVirtualKey and ToUnicodeEx to capture keystrokes.
This class contains the other functionalities of the RAT.
The important activities are summarized below:
The string “050ed846adcc1b8729af0a70a0fefe4d” is hardcoded in the sample.
Besides storing the keylogger logs, the sub registry key HKCU\Software\050ed846adcc1b8729af0a70a0fefe4d\ also contains malicious executables loaded from the sample as binary data.
Malicious executables stored in Windows Registry
All those samples are, of course, detected by the Fortinet AntiVirus service:
The strings in b88ece4c04f706c9717bbe6fbda49ed2 reference No-IP’s Dynamic Update Client (DUC) that automatically updates the IP address if it changes, but also contain lines like “SELECT * FROM moz_logins” to obtain Firefox’s stored credentials.
Part of a malicious executable stored as data
Command used by the sample to create a firewall rule
Example of the keylogging functionality
This stolen information is sent to the malicious URL in hopto.org or myftp.biz domain using port 1177, 5552, or 5112, depending on the sample.
The traffic can be detected by Fortinet IPS signature Bladabindi.Botnet.
Fragment of the coded data sent to the C&C
Here are some examples of the decoded windows names:
Sends the data collected by the keylogger.
Adds a value to the subkey HKCU\Software\050ed846adcc1b8729af0a70a0fefe4d\
Adds a value to the subkey HKCU\Software\050ed846adcc1b8729af0a70a0fefe4d\
Sends data to the C&C.
Deletes the specified registry key.
Downloads a file and executes it.
Takes screenshot, saves it as JPEG, and sends it to its C&C.
Deletes the registry keys, the file server.exe in the Startup folder and the firewall rule to allow it.
Ends current process and starts a new one.
Downloads file from a remote server and executes it.
Afterwards it deletes the registry keys and the files related to the infection.
This command is used for updates.
Obtains information about the running processes, the services, and the active connections.
Opens a chat window so that the C&C can communicate with the infected computer.
A fragment of the decompiled code for the “CAP” command to take screenshots can be seen below.
It basically uses CopyFromScreen to copy the screen’s pixels to the bitmap through a graphic object.
Fragment of code to take screenshots
When active, the domain prosa15.myftp.biz is used by the sample to connect to its C&C through port 1177.
To simulate the RAT behavior in a controlled environment, a sample of njRAT was downloaded and installed.
Once the sample connected to the C&C, the panel displayed information such as its IP address, its computer name, country, whether a webcam was installed, the active window, and a small screenshot.
Figure 8. njRAT’s administration panel
The picture below shows part of the data collected by the keylogger.
Not only does it record the pressed keys, but it also specifies the window in which the words were written.
As mentioned above, the malware is also capable of collecting active processes, services, and connections, accessing the registry keys, and executing commands with a remote shell.
Other capabilities of the RAT
Both hopto.org and myftp.biz domains are available, amongst various other options, from the dynamic DNS provider called No-IP.
The use of this service guarantees that an infected PC will be able to maintain communication with its C&C even if it changes the IP address.
From September 12 to November 16, our FortiGuard analysis system collected 194 samples connecting to hopto.org or myftp.biz.
Out of those, 166 were related to Bladabindi samples and the rest to different threats, which indicates that the use of dynamic DNS providers could now be more common amongst malware writers.
Although it is common for this malware family to report to its C&C using port 1177, the information gathered reveals that ports 5552 and 5112 are also now being used.
Finally, the next chart shows the number of samples collected by our FortiGuard analysis system from September 12 to November 16.
The Bladabindi malware family continues to be one of the most popular threats because of how easy it is to download.
In fact, there are plenty of videos and websites available that provide detailed tutorials of how to use it.
One proof of its ease of use is the fact that many of the collected samples hadn’t been submitted to Virus Total at the time of the analysis.
Furthermore, the samples we examined use dynamic DNS services that make it hard to monitor and keep track of the domains and the IP addresses used.

cybersecurity research, 
    
      FortiGuard Labs, 
    
      Bladabindi malware
Copyright © 2021 Fortinet, Inc. All Rights Reserved
