The Elfin espionage group (aka APT33) has remained highly active over the past three years, attacking at least 50 organizations in Saudi Arabia, the United States, and a range of other countries.
The group, which first became active in late 2015 or early 2016, specializes in scanning for vulnerable websites and using this to identify potential targets, either for attacks or creation of command and control (C&C) infrastructure.
It has compromised a wide range of targets, including governments along with organizations in the research, chemical, engineering, manufacturing, consulting, finance, telecoms, and several other sectors.
Elfin continues to be focused heavily on Saudi Arabia, which accounted for 42 percent of attacks observed by Symantec since the beginning of 2016.
However, the U.S. has also been a country of significant interest to the group, with 18 organizations attacked over the past three years, including a number of Fortune 500 companies.
Elfin targets in the U.S. have included organizations in the engineering, chemical, research, energy consultancy, finance, IT, and healthcare sectors.
Some of these U.S. organizations may have been targeted by Elfin for the purpose of mounting supply chain attacks.
In one instance, a large U.S. company was attacked in the same month a Middle Eastern company it co-owns was also compromised.
In a recent wave of attacks during February 2019, Elfin attempted to exploit a known vulnerability (CVE-2018-20250) in WinRAR, the widely used file archiving and compression utility capable of creating self-extracting archive files.
The exploit was used against one target in the chemical sector in Saudi Arabia.
If successfully exploited on an unpatched computer, the vulnerability could permit an attacker to install any file on the computer, which effectively permits code execution on the targeted computer.
Two users in the targeted organization received a file called "JobDetails.rar", which attempted to exploit the WinRAR vulnerability.
This file was likely delivered via a spear-phishing email.
However, prior to this attempted attack, Symantec had rolled out proactive protection against any attempt to exploit this vulnerability (Exp.CVE-2018-20250).
This protection successfully protected the targeted organization from being compromised.
Elfin came under the spotlight in December 2018 when it was linked with a new wave of Shamoon attacks.
One Shamoon victim in Saudi Arabia had recently also been attacked by Elfin and had been infected with the Stonedrill malware (Trojan.Stonedrill) used by Elfin.
Because the Elfin and the Shamoon attacks against this organization occurred so close together, there has been speculation that the two groups may be linked.
However, Symantec has found no further evidence to suggest Elfin was responsible for these Shamoon attacks to date.
We continue to monitor the activities of both groups closely.
Elfin has deployed a wide range of tools in its attacks including custom malware, commodity malware, and open-source hacking tools.
Custom malware used by the group include:
In addition to its custom malware, Elfin has also used a number of commodity malware tools, available for purchase on the cyber underground.
Elfin also makes frequent use of a number of publicly available hacking tools, including:
In this section, we describe in detail an Elfin attack on a U.S. organization.
On February 12, 2018 at 16:45 (all times are in the organization’s local time), an email was sent to the organization advertising a job vacancy at an American global service provider.
The email contained a malicious link to hxxp://mynetwork.ddns[DOT].net:880.
The recipient clicked the link and proceeded to download and open a malicious HTML executable file, which in turn loaded content from a C&C server via an embedded iframe.
At the same time, code embedded within this file also executed a PowerShell command to download and execute a copy of chfeeds.vbe from the C&C server.
A second JavaScript command was also executed, which created a scheduled task to execute chfeeds.vbe multiple times a day.
The chfeeds.vbe file acts as a downloader and was used to download a second PowerShell script (registry.ps1).
This script in turn downloaded and executed a PowerShell backdoor known as POSHC2, a proxy-aware C&C framework, from the C&C server (hxxps:// host-manager.hopto.org).
Later at 20:57, the attackers became active on the compromised machine and proceeded to download the archiving tool WinRAR.
At 23:29, the attackers then proceeded to deploy an updated version of their POSHC2 stager.
This tool was downloaded several times between 23:29 on February 12 and 07:47 on February 13.
Two days later, on February 14 at 15:12, the attackers returned and installed Quasar RAT onto the infected computer that communicated with a C&C server (217.147.168.123).
Quasar RAT was installed to CSIDL_PROFILE\appdata\roaming\microsoft\crypto\smss.exe.
At this point, the attackers ceased activity while maintaining access to the network until February 21.
At 06:38, the attackers were observed downloading a custom .NET FTP tool to the infected computer.
Later at 6:56, the attackers exfiltrated data using this FTP tool to a remote host:
Activity ceased until the attackers returned on March 5 and were observed using Quasar RAT to download a second custom AutoIt FTP exfiltration tool known as FastUploader from hxxp://192.119.15[DOT]36:880/ftp.exe.
This tool was then installed to csidl_profile\appdata\roaming\adobe\ftp.exe.
FastUploader is a custom FTP tool designed to exfiltrate data at a faster rate than traditional FTP clients.
At this point, additional activity from the attackers continued between March 5 into April, and on April 18 at 11:50, a second remote access tool known as DarkComet was deployed to csidl_profile\appdata\roaming\microsoft\windows\start menu\programs\startup\smss.exe on the infected computer.
Activity continued throughout April where additional versions of DarkComet, POSHC2 implants, and an AutoIt backdoor were deployed along with further credential dumping activities.
Elfin is one of the most active groups currently operating in the Middle East, targeting a large number of organizations across a diverse range of sectors.
Over the past three years, the group has utilized a wide array of tools against its victims, ranging from custom built malware to off-the-shelf RATs, indicating a willingness to continually revise its tactics and find whatever tools it takes to compromise its next set of victims.
Symantec has the following protection in place to protect customers against these attacks:
In addition to file-based protection, customers of the DeepSight Intelligence Managed Adversary and Threat Intelligence (MATI) service have received reports on Elfin, which detail methods of detecting and thwarting activities of this group.
The Threat Hunter Team is a group of security experts within Symantec whose mission is to investigate targeted attacks, drive enhanced protection in Symantec products, and offer analysis that helps customers respond to attacks.
We encourage you to share your thoughts on your favorite social platform.
