
 by
                    Chris (Intel Security)


                    on
                   Jun 24, 2015 at 15:49 UTC
Brand Representative for Intel Security
The help desk software for IT.
Track users' IT needs, easily, and with only the features you need.
Cyberespionage continues to be a hot topic in our industry, and the information security nerd in me always finds it exciting when our McAfee Labs team is able to speak about their findings.
Here is a blog post from Rahul Mohandas on a recent campaign:﻿
﻿Stealthy Cyberespionage Campaign Attacks With Social Engineering
Cyberespionage attacks pose a challenge for the security industry as well as for the organizations trying to protect against them.
Last year, McAfee Labs predicted that in 2015 these attacks would increase in frequency and become stealthier, and we have seen this occur.
Cyberespionage aims at specific organization or sectors that are high-value targets, with most attacks flying under the radar.
The McAfee Labs research team has tracked an advanced persistent threat for the past couple of months.
This group has evolved a lot in sophistication and evasion techniques to defeat detection by security products.
This group has been active since at least 2014 and uses spear-phishing campaigns to target enterprises.
We have observed this group targeting defense, aerospace, and legal sector companies.
The preceding email provides a clear indication that the attackers have researched their target and its employees.
Social media sites such as LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook are good sources of such valuable information, which can be used for social-engineering attacks.
The Excel attachment opens with a “password protected” window, tricking the victim into believing the file requires a password to display the content.
The Excel file is laced with a malicious macro that runs in the background.
To prevent easy detection, the macro is obfuscated using Base64.
The Excel file drops an .hta file, which contains the backdoor functionality.
This attack uses some novel techniques:
The attack minimizes its footprint by running only a script, which has lower chance of being flagged as malicious.
Some of the backdoor capabilities:
The WMI queries collect system-related data.
The following parameters are collected and Base64 encoded before posting to the control servers:
The JavaScript backdoor connects to a gateway that receives additional commands from the attacker.
Some of the control servers:
One of the attacker’s first actions is to profile the infected host by executing commands that display a list of domains, computers, or resources shared by the specified computer (using the net view command).
This is followed by gathering more information about the files on the desktop and other drives.
An attacker can use this information for further lateral movement.
All the data is posted to the control server as Base64-encoded data.
Defending against these highly targeted social-engineering attacks involves a human element.
Although technical controls mitigate the risks, it’s imperative that organizations establish policies to help employees spot suspicious events.
McAfee Advanced Threat Defense provides zero-day protection against this attack based on its behavior.
The following Yara rule detects the OLE attack vector:
rule APT_OLE_JSRat{meta:author = “Rahul Mohandas”Date = “2015-06-16″Description = “Targeted attack using Excel/word documents”
strings:$header = {D0 CF 11 E0 A1 B1 1A E1}$key1 = “AAAAAAAAAA”$key2 = “Base64Str” nocase$key3 = “DeleteFile” nocase$key4 = “Scripting.FileSystemObject” nocase
condition:$header at 0 and (all of ($key*) )}
﻿I thank my colleague Kumaraguru Velmurugan of the Advanced Threat Defense Group for his invaluable assistance.
Whelton Network Solutions is an IT service provider.
Basic rule of thumb, Java should never be considered a secure thing, and should be avoided at all costs.
Whelton Network Solutions is an IT service provider.
Ironically, given they are the authors, the McAfee Network Security Manager, the application that manages it's IPS Applianced has a very heavy reliance upon Java....
The ol' basic rule of thumb in IT persists:  if it looks funky, don't eat it.
Funny how that works in everyday life, too.

        This topic has been locked by an administrator and is no longer open for commenting.

        To continue this discussion, please
        ask a new question.
