Leviathan is a cyber espionage group that has been active since at least 2013.
Leviathan was previously reported upon by FireEye as TEMP.Periscope and TEMP.Jumper.
The group identified by Proofpoint as Leviathan appears to significantly overlap with FireEye's reporting on APT40.
Additionally, FireEye reporting on TEMP.Periscope (which was combined into APT40) indicated TEMP.Periscope was reported upon as Leviathan.
Leviathan was previously reported upon by FireEye as TEMP.Periscope and TEMP.Jumper.
Leviathan has used BITSAdmin to download additional tools.
Leviathan has used JavaScript to create a shortcut file in the Startup folder that points to its main backdoor.
Leviathan has used JavaScript to create a shortcut file in the Startup folder that points to its main backdoor.
Leviathan has used PowerShell for execution.
Leviathan uses a backdoor known as BADFLICK that is is capable of generating a reverse shell, and has used multiple types of scripting for execution, including JavaScript and JavaScript Scriptlets in XML.[1].
Leviathan has used C:\Windows\Debug and C:\Perflogs as staging directories.
Leviathan has used a DLL known as SeDll to decrypt and execute other JavaScript backdoors.
Leviathan has used WMI for persistence.
Leviathan has used an uploader known as LUNCHMONEY that can exfiltrate files to Dropbox.
Leviathan has exploited multiple Microsoft Office and .NET vulnerabilities for execution, including CVE-2017-0199, CVE-2017-8759, and CVE-2017-11882.
Leviathan has downloaded additional scripts and files from adversary-controlled servers.
Leviathan has obfuscated code using base64 and gzip compression.
Leviathan has inserted garbage characters into code, presumably to avoid anti-virus detection.
Leviathan has used publicly available tools to dump password hashes, including HOMEFRY.
Leviathan has used publicly available tools to dump password hashes, including ProcDump and WCE.
Leviathan has sent spearphishing emails with malicious attachments, including .rtf, .doc, and .xls files.
Leviathan has sent spearphishing emails with links, often using a fraudulent lookalike domain and stolen branding.
Leviathan has targeted RDP credentials and used it to move through the victim environment.
Leviathan used ssh for internal reconnaissance.
Leviathan relies on web shells for an initial foothold as well as persistence into the victim's systems.
Leviathan has used regsvr32 for execution.
Leviathan has used stolen code signing certificates to sign malware.
Leviathan has sent spearphishing email links attempting to get a user to click.
Leviathan has sent spearphishing attachments attempting to get a user to click.
Leviathan has used valid, compromised email accounts for defense evasion, including to send malicious emails to other victim organizations.
Leviathan has received C2 instructions from user profiles created on legitimate websites such as Github and TechNet.
Leviathan has used WMI for execution.

                     © 2015-2021, The MITRE Corporation.
MITRE ATT&CK and ATT&CK are registered trademarks of The MITRE Corporation.
