Real Intrusions by Real Attackers, The Truth Behind the Intrusion
Since the end of September Ryuk has been screaming back into the news.
We’ve already covered 2 cases in that timeframe.
We’ve seen major healthcare providers, managed service providers, and furniture manufactures all reportedly being hit.
The Cyber Security and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) released an advisory claiming that a mass Ryuk campaign against the United States healthcare system was an imminent threat.
FireEye released a post, and hosted a webinar with SANS and @likethecoins, detailing a group FireEye identifies as UNC 1878.
In their report, they describe a threat actor’s TTPs that align with the activity we’ve previously reported on.
They indicated in their investigations and responses of seeing the group take just 2 to 5 days from entry to full domain ransomware deployment.
In our cases we’ve seen even faster action, with the threat actors seemly trying to speed-run their ransomware deployment.
In this most recent case, ransomware was deployed in 2 hours with the actor completing all objectives in 3 hours.
Red Canary released a post recently on how they, with the support of Kroll, stopped a Ryuk intrusion at a hospital.
This report includes 10 detection ideas as well as a feel good story on how they stopped the intrusion.
We need more reports like this, especially right now.
SCYTHE recently put out an adversary emulation plan and a post based on our previous Ryuk reports.
You can check out the post here and the free emulation plan here.
Great job @jorgeorchilles, @seanqsun and the rest of the SCYTHE team for sharing this with the community!
Like in our prior two reports of Ryuk campaigns, the initial access came from phishing emails containing links to google drive that when clicked, downloaded a Bazar Loader backdoor executable.
In our prior cases we generally saw a lag time, ranging hours to days, from the initial click to Ryuk.
In this case, the time from initial Bazar execution to domain recon was 5 minutes, and deployment of  Cobalt Strike beacons was within 10 minutes.
This is by far the quickest we have seen them act.
After bringing in Cobalt Strike, we saw familiar TTP’s with using AdFind to continue domain discovery activity.
In this case, we saw them deploy persistence on the beachhead host, an action we had not previously seen in our other cases.
After establishing another C2 for an additional Cobalt Strike beacon, they employed the Zerologon exploit (CVE 2020-1472) and obtained domain admin level privileges.
We also saw host process injection on the beachhead used for obfuscation and privilege escalation.
With domain administrator privileges obtained, the threat actors then moved laterally throughout the network using SMB and RDP to deploy Cobalt Strike beacons on the domain controllers around 1 hour after the initial execution of Bazar.
On the domain controllers, some additional discovery was done using the PowerShell Active Directory module.
From there, they targeted other severs in the environment; specifically, back up systems, file servers, and software deployment servers.
After establishing Cobalt Strike beacons on those they felt ready to proceed to their final objectives.
At the 2 hour mark the threat actors made the move to deploy Ryuk ransomware by establishing RDP connections from the domain controllers to servers.
This continued for the next hour until the entire domain had been encrypted, with that work completing just 3 hours after the first Bazar Loader was executed.
Initial access via a phishing email that linked to a google docs page that enticed the user to download a report, which was  a Bazar Loader executable file instead Report-Review20-10.exe.
Execution of the initial Bazar Loader malware relies on user interaction.
Executables transferred over SMB during lateral movement were commonly executed via a service.
This time, unlike prior investigations, clear persistence was found setup on the beachhead host.
Firefox.exe created these scheduled tasks as well as the run key.
The Zerologon vulnerability CVE 2020-1472 was again exploited to obtain domain admin level privileges.
Rubeus was used to kerberoast the environment.
Process injection was used on the beachhead host to to inject into svchost.exe
The Bazar Loader malware was using a code signing certificate signed by Digicert under the organization NOSOV SP Z O O
At the time of delivery, the executable had a detection rate of 1/69 in Virustotal.
The Cobalt Strike beacons used in the environment used similar code signing certificates.
In previous cases, we generally saw some lag time between infection and further actions but this time things moved much quicker, starting with initial discovery executed by Bazar less than 5 minutes after initial execution.
Discovery command run by Bazar:
Seven minutes later, after launching a Cobalt Strike beacon, AdFind was used– running the same discovery pattern seen in previous reporting.
This was started via a bat script.
It appears that the threat actors are now piping these commands into a batch file one at a time instead of dropping adf.bat to disk.
Once on the domain controller the PowerShell Active Directory module was loaded.
RDP connections were initiated from Cobalt Strike Beacons running on the beachhead host to two domain controllers and then Cobalt Strike executables were dropped by these connections.
In addition to using RDP to move around the environment execuatables were also transferred over SMB to ADMIN$ shares and executed as a service.
Discovery data (AdFind and Rubeus outputs ) was exfiltrated out of the network via FTP.
At roughly the 2 hour mark, we saw the threat actors begin to act on their final objectives.
RDP connections were initiated from one of the domain controllers and the Ryuk executables were deployed and executed over these RDP connections.
Servers such as the backup systems, file servers, and automation tools were targeted first, followed by workstations.
Commands ran prior to ransom execution:
While encryption was started 2 hours into the attack, by the 3 hour mark the actors had completed ransom of the entire environment.
Please consider donating $1 or more to the project using Patreon.
Thank you for your support!
We also have pcaps, files, memory images, and Kape packages available here.
Detects AdFind usage from a past case:
UNC 1878 Indicators released by FireEye:
UNC 1878 Indicators from Threatconnect:
Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Intro The Ryuk threat actors went from a phishing email to domain wide ransomware in 5 hours.
They escalated privileges using Zerologon (CVE-2020-1472), less than 2 hours after the initial … Read More
Intro The Ryuk group went from an email to domain wide ransomware in 29 hours and asked for over $6 million to unlock our systems.
They used tools such as … Read More
The threat actor logged in through RDP, attempted to run a Cobalt Strike Beacon, and then dumped memory using ProcDump and Mimikatz.
Next, they RDPed into a Domain Controller, minutes … Read More
Here’s another example of threat actors brute forcing RDP to install ransomware, this time the brute forced system was not using the default RDP port.
The threat actors installed ransomware … Read More
