Already have an account?Log in
Workplace, website, and app search
Unified logs, metrics, and APM data
SIEM, endpoint, and threat hunting
ElasticON Global is a wrap!
Watch all of the content on demand now.
Our story, teams, Source Code
Find or become a partner
Elastic is a search company.
The Elastic Security Intelligence & Analytics Team researches adversary innovations of many kinds, and has recently focused on an activity group that leveraged remote templates, VBA code evasion, and DLL side-loading techniques.
Based on code similarity and shared tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), the team assessed this activity to be possibly linked to a Chinese-based group known as APT40, or Leviathan.
The group’s campaign appears to target Malaysian government officials with a lure regarding the 2020 Malaysian political crisis.
To initiate their advanced persistent threat (APT) campaign, the group likely delivered a Microsoft Word document as a phishing lure attachment.
The image used in the lure (Figure 2) appears to be crafted from a broadcast announcement shared by a Malaysian blogger (Figure 1).
The lure image includes the same broadcast time, but the date and speech topic are removed.
Once this attachment is opened, a decoy document is presented while behind the scenes, taking the following actions:
This technique is known as template injection, which you may recall from our Playing defense against Gamaredon Group blog post.
This an effective approach used by adversaries to bypass perimeter controls such as email gateways.
Both embedded DLLs (sl1.tmp and sl2.tmp) are similar and export the same function names: RCT and RCP.
This implementation stood out to our researchers due to a behavioral idiosyncrasy:
The embedded DLLs, sl1.tmp and sl2.tmp, have very limited functionality — exporting the RCP and RCT functions.
The RCP function implements the WinExec method to execute commands where the RCT function uses the URLDownloadToFileA method to download a file from a specified URL.
LogiMailApp.exe, which is downloaded by sl1.tmp and executed by sl2.tmp, is vulnerable to a form of DLL search-order hijacking called side-loading, which automatically searches for and executes LogiMail.dll if found in the same directory.
Forms of DLL search-order hijacking can be used with many third-party software applications.
In this case, search-order hijacking was used to load a backdoor that exports the following notable functions:
The adversary-created binary LogiMail.dll exports the function DllGetClassObject that contains critical logic for the execution flow of this sample:
The decrypted second stage backdoor is mapped into memory and then its original entry point (OEP) is called, thus bypassing successful detections based on file system scanning.
Both the payload staging server and the second stage infrastructure use dynamic DNS:
This payload supports the following capabilities:
Earlier in the year, the Malaysian Computer Emergency Response Team (MyCERT) issued an advisory related to espionage activity targeting their country.
The report listed different TTPs and included multiple samples and other technical indicators that align with a threat group known as APT40/Leviathan.
At a high level, this sample follows the continued trend of targeting Malaysian victims using specific TTPs such as remote templates, employing macros, using DLL side-loading techniques, and leveraging an in-memory implant with dynamic DNS for command and control.
More specifically, the second stage implant from this lure shares unique strings and URL references and contains similar functionality that correlates with the previous reporting for APT40/Leviathan.
With these similarities, our Intelligence & Analytics Team assesses with moderate confidence that this activity is linked to APT40/Leviathan.
Implant String Similarities with MyCERT Sample:
In this post, we highlighted a recent sample that most likely represents the work of a highly organized adversary.
Activity groups like this are significant for everyone to take notice of, if only because they represent a higher maturity level of post-exploit innovation.
Their cutting edge TTPs today end up being everyone’s run of the mill tomorrow; it’s important to learn from these events.
We hope that by sharing some of these insights, we can help raise awareness and continue to focus on protecting the world's data from attack.
To enable organizations further, we’ve added all the observed MITRE ATT&CK® techniques and indicators of compromise (IoCs) below.
Watch all of the content on demand now and take your organization's search, observability, or security capabilities to a whole new level.
Elasticsearch B.V. All Rights Reserved
Elasticsearch is a trademark of Elasticsearch B.V., registered in the U.S. and in other countries.
Apache, Apache Lucene, Apache Hadoop, Hadoop, HDFS and the yellow elephant logo are trademarks of the Apache Software Foundation in the United States and/or other countries.
Elasticsearch B.V. All Rights Reserved
