By: Jason Reaves and Joshua Platt
The stager employs an interesting technique to check for being detonated in controlled environments such as sandboxes that might overwrite sleep values, at the same time it also checks for network connectivity.
The stager utilizes raw sockets to connect to ‘google.com’ over port 80 and send a GET request.
The request is not parsed as an HTTP request in most utilities including Wireshark[2] and Suricata[3] because it is incomplete with just a newline and no carriage return.
The request is enough to retrieve the 404 response from the webserver and then the malware begins parsing the values out of the date, specifically it parses out the day, year and time values.
After parsing out the values it converts it to seconds but without accounting for the month.
Above you can see a sleep call is sandwiched by two of these calls to the function responsible for retrieving the converted value from a google request, the sleep is 30 seconds and then it checks if the values differ less than 28.
It is checking if the process took less than 28 seconds or not.
If the check fails then a fake DirectX error message is displayed, otherwise the process for decoding the stager shellcode begins.
The shellcode is decoded by utilizing floating point mnemonics, judging by some of the actors testing this appears to be pretty good at bypassing static detection engines.
The process involved begins with floating point modulus against a table of data using a key value that is hardcoded.
After the modulus the value is rounded to an int value.
Example python code for decoding the data can be seen below:
Using our decode code we can quickly enumerate samples for decoding out the shellcode and harvesting IOCs.
We’re powering the next great retail disruption.
We’re powering the next great retail disruption.
Learn more about us — https://www.linkedin.com/company/walmartglobaltech/
Malware Researcher, Crimeware Threat Intel, Reverse Engineer @Walmart
We’re powering the next great retail disruption.
Learn more about us — https://www.linkedin.com/company/walmartglobaltech/
