We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You can change your cookie settings at any time.

                          Find out what the government is doing
News stories, speeches, letters and notices
Detailed guidance, regulations and rules
Reports, analysis and official statistics
Government data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports
UK joins likeminded partners to confirm Chinese state-backed actors were responsible for gaining access to computer networks via Microsoft Exchange servers.
The UK is joining likeminded partners to confirm that Chinese state-backed actors were responsible for gaining access to computer networks around the world via Microsoft Exchange servers.
The attacks took place in early 2021, affecting over a quarter of a million servers worldwide.
The cyber attack on Microsoft Exchange Server by Chinese state-backed groups was a reckless but familiar pattern of behaviour.
The Chinese Government must end this systematic cyber sabotage and can expect to be held account if it does not.
The attack was highly likely to enable large-scale espionage, including acquiring personally identifiable information and intellectual property.
At the time of the attack, the UK quickly provided advice and recommended actions to those affected and Microsoft said that by end of March that 92% of customers had patched against the vulnerability.
Today the UK is also attributing the Chinese Ministry of State Security as being behind activity known by cyber security experts as “APT40” and “APT31”.
Widespread, credible evidence demonstrates that sustained, irresponsible cyber activity emanating from China continues.
The Chinese government has ignored repeated calls to end its reckless campaign, instead allowing its state-backed actors to increase the scale of their attacks and act recklessly when caught.
This coordinated action today sees the international community once again urge the Chinese government to take responsibility for its actions and respect the democratic institutions, personal data and commercial interests of those with whom it seeks to partner.
The UK is calling on China to reaffirm the commitment made to the UK in 2015 and as part of the G20 not to conduct or support cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property of trade secrets.
The National Cyber Security Centre has assessed that:
Contact the FCDO Communication Team via email (monitored 24 hours a day) in the first instance, and we will respond as soon as possible.

Check what you need to do
Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
We’ll send you a link to a feedback form.
It will take only 2 minutes to fill in.
Don’t worry we won’t send you spam or share your email address with anyone.
