Automatically investigate security alerts to reduce false positives.
Validate that security controls are working as expected.
Take decisive action with industry leading threat intelligence.
Fully map your entire environment to mitigate risks.
Defend your enterprise with managed detection and response.
Battle-test how well your security program performs.
Establish and properly orchestrate cyber defenses.
Train your security team to effectively protect your enterprise.
See case studies and customer testimonials.
Read expert perspectives and industry news.
Expand your cyber security knowledge base.
Listen to our State of the Hack, Eye on Security and Cyber Security Effectiveness podcasts.
Threat Intelligence from front line experts.
Explore the latest views on key threats, trends and predictions.
Update (May 14): Mandiant has observed multiple actors cite a May 13 announcement that appeared to be shared with DARKSIDE RaaS affiliates by the operators of the service.
This announcement stated that they lost access to their infrastructure, including their blog, payment, and CDN servers, and would be closing their service.
Decrypters would also be provided for companies who have not paid, possibly to their affiliates to distribute.
The post cited law enforcement pressure and pressure from the United States for this decision.
We have not independently validated these claims and there is some speculation by other actors that this could be an exit scam.
Since initially surfacing in August 2020, the creators of DARKSIDE ransomware and their affiliates have launched a global crime spree affecting organizations in more than 15 countries and multiple industry verticals.
Like many of their peers, these actors conduct multifaceted extortion where data is both exfiltrated and encrypted in place, allowing them to demand payment for unlocking and the non-release of stolen data to exert more pressure on victims.
The origins of these incidents are not monolithic.
DARKSIDE ransomware operates as a ransomware-as-a-service (RaaS) wherein profit is shared between its owners and partners, or affiliates, who provide access to organizations and deploy the ransomware.
Mandiant currently tracks multiple threat clusters that have deployed this ransomware, which is consistent with multiple affiliates using DARKSIDE.
These clusters demonstrated varying levels of technical sophistication throughout intrusions.
While the threat actors commonly relied on commercially available and legitimate tools to facilitate various stages of their operations, at least one of the threat clusters also employed a now patched zero-day vulnerability.
Reporting on DARKSIDE has been available in advance of this blog post to users of Mandiant Advantage Free, a no-cost version of our threat intelligence platform.
Mandiant has identified multiple DARKSIDE victims through our incident response engagements and from reports on the DARKSIDE blog.
Most of the victim organizations were based in the United States and span across multiple sectors, including financial services, legal, manufacturing, professional services, retail, and technology.
The number of publicly named victims on the DARKSIDE blog has increased overall since August 2020, with the exception of a significant dip in the number of victims named during January 2021 (Figure 1).
It is plausible that the decline in January was due to threat actors using DARKSIDE taking a break during the holiday season.
The overall growth in the number of victims demonstrates the increasing use of the DARKSIDE ransomware by multiple affiliates.
Figure 1: Known DARKSIDE victims (August 2020 to April 2021)
Beginning in November 2020, the Russian-speaking actor "darksupp" advertised DARKSIDE RaaS on the Russian-language forums exploit.in and xss.is.
In April 2021, darksupp posted an update for the "Darkside 2.0" RaaS that included several new features and a description of the types of partners and services they were currently seeking (Table 1).
Affiliates retain a percentage of the ransom fee from each victim.
Based on forum advertisements, the RaaS operators take 25% for ransom fees less than $500,000, but this decreases to 10 percent for ransom fees greater than $5 million.
In addition to providing builds of DARKSIDE ransomware, the operators of this service also maintain a blog accessible via TOR.
The actors use this site to publicize victims in an attempt to pressure these organizations into paying for the non-release of stolen data.
A recent update to their underground forum advertisement also indicates that actors may attempt to DDoS victim organizations.
The actor darksupp has stated that affiliates are prohibited from targeting hospitals, schools, universities, non-profit organizations, and public sector entities.
This may be an effort by the actor(s) to deter law enforcement action, since targeting of these sectors may invite additional scrutiny.
Affiliates are also prohibited from targeting organizations in Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) nations.
Ability to generate builds for both Windows and Linux environments from within the administration panel.
Encrypts files using Salsa20 encryption along with an RSA-1024 public key
Access to an administrative panel via TOR that can be used by clients to manage Darkside builds, payments, blog posts, and communication with victims
The admin panel includes a Blog section that allows clients to publish victim information and announcements to the Darkside website for the purposes of shaming victims and coercing them to pay ransom demands
The process from encryption to withdrawal of money is automated and no longer relies on support.
Available DDoS of targets (Layer 3, Layer 7)
Sought a partner to provide network accesses to them and a person or team with pentesting skills
Table 1: Notable features and updates listed on DARKSIDE advertisement thread (exploit.in)
DARKSIDE RaaS affiliates are required to pass an interview after which they are provided access to an administration panel (Figure 2).
Within this panel, affiliates can perform various actions such as creating a ransomware build, specifying content for the DARKSIDE blog, managing victims, and contacting support.
Mandiant has identified at least five Russian-speaking actors who may currently, or have previously, been DARKSIDE affiliates.
Relevant advertisements associated with a portion of these threat actors have been aimed at finding either initial access providers or actors capable of deploying ransomware on accesses already obtained.
Some actors claiming to use DARKSIDE have also allegedly partnered with other RaaS affiliate programs, including BABUK and SODINOKIBI (aka REvil).
For more information on these threat actors, please see Mandiant Advantage.
Figure 2: DARKSIDE affiliate panel
Mandiant currently tracks five clusters of threat activity that have involved the deployment of DARKSIDE.
For more information on uncategorized threats, refer to our post, "DebUNCing Attribution: How Mandiant Tracks Uncategorized Threat Actors."
These clusters may represent different affiliates of the DARKSIDE RaaS platform.
Throughout observed incidents, the threat actor commonly relied on various publicly available and legitimate tools that are commonly used to facilitate various stages of the attack lifecycle in post-exploitation ransomware attacks (Figure 3).
Additional details on three of these UNC groups are included below.
Figure 3: TTPs seen throughout DARKSIDE ransomware engagements
UNC2628 has been active since at least February 2021.
Their intrusions progress relatively quickly with the threat actor typically deploying ransomware in two to three days.
We have some evidence that suggests UNC2628 has partnered with other RaaS including SODINOKIBI (REvil) and NETWALKER.
UNC2659 has been active since at least January 2021.
We have observed the threat actor move through the whole attack lifecycle in under 10 days.
UNC2659 is notable given their use of an exploit in the SonicWall SMA100 SSL VPN product, which has since been patched by SonicWall.
The threat actor appeared to download several tools used for various phases of the attack lifecycle directly from those tools’ legitimate public websites.
UNC2465 activity dates back to at least April 2019 and is characterized by their use of similar TTPs to distribute the PowerShell-based .NET backdoor SMOKEDHAM in victim environments.
In one case where DARKSIDE was deployed, there were months-long gaps, with only intermittent activity between the time of initial compromise to ransomware deployment.
In some cases, this could indicate that initial access was provided by a separate actor.
We believe that threat actors have become more proficient at conducting multifaceted extortion operations and that this success has directly contributed to the rapid increase in the number of high-impact ransomware incidents over the past few years.
Ransomware operators have incorporated additional extortion tactics designed to increase the likelihood that victims will acquiesce to paying the ransom prices.
As one example, in late April 2021, the DARKSIDE operators released a press release stating that they were targeting organizations listed on the NASDAQ and other stock markets.
They indicated that they would be willing to give stock traders information about upcoming leaks in order to allow them potential profits due to stock price drops after an announced breach.
In another notable example, an attacker was able to obtain the victim's cyber insurance policy and leveraged this information during the ransom negotiation process refusing to lower the ransom amount given their knowledge of the policy limits.
This reinforces that during the post-exploitation phase of ransomware incidents, threat actors can engage in internal reconnaissance and obtain data to increase their negotiating power.
We expect that the extortion tactics that threat actors use to pressure victims will continue to evolve throughout 2021.
Based on the evidence that DARKSIDE ransomware is distributed by multiple actors, we anticipate that the TTPs used throughout incidents associated with this ransomware will continue to vary somewhat.
For more comprehensive recommendations for addressing ransomware, please refer to our blog post: "Ransomware Protection and Containment Strategies: Practical Guidance for Endpoint Protection, Hardening, and Containment" and the linked white paper.
Beyond the comparatively small number of people who are listed as authors on this report are hundreds of consultants, analysts and reverse-engineers who tirelessly put in the work needed to respond to intrusions at breakneck pace and still maintain unbelievably high analytical standards.
This larger group has set the foundation for all of our work, but a smaller group of people contributed more directly to producing this report and we would like to thank them by name.
We would like to specifically thank Bryce Abdo and Matthew Dunwoody from our Advanced Practices team and Jay Smith from FLARE, all of whom provided analytical support and technical review.
Notable support was also provided by Ioana Teaca, and Muhammadumer Khan.
DARKSIDE is a ransomware written in C that may be configured to encrypt files on fixed and removable disks as well as network shares.
DARKSIDE RaaS affiliates are given access to an administration panel on which they create builds for specific victims.
The panel allows some degree of customization for each ransomware build such as choosing the encryption mode and whether local disks and network shares should be encrypted (Figures 4).
The following malware analysis is based on the file MD5: 1a700f845849e573ab3148daef1a3b0b.
A more recently analyzed DARKSIDE sample had the following notable differences:
Figure 4: DARKSIDE build configuration options appearing in the administration panel
Early versions of the malware did not contain a persistence mechanism.
An external tool or installer was required if the attacker desired persistence.
This string of characters is referenced as <ransom_ext>.
Service Name: <ransom_ext>
Description: <ransom_ext>
%CD%\LOG<ransom_ext>.TXT
README<ransom_ext>.TXT
<original_filename_plus_ext><ransom_ext>
May version: %PROGRAMDATA%\<ransom_ext>.ico
The DARKSIDE version observed in May sets the following registry key:
The malware initializes a 0x100-byte keystream used to decrypt strings and configuration data.
Strings are decrypted as needed and overwritten with NULL bytes after use.
The malware's configuration size is 0xBE9 bytes.
A portion of the decrypted configuration is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Partial decrypted configuration
The sample's 0x80-byte RSA public key blob begins at offset 0x80.
The DWORD value at offset 0x100 is multiplied by 64 and an amount of memory equivalent to the result is allocated.
The remaining bytes, which start at offset 0x104, are aPLib-decompressed into the allocated buffer.
The decompressed bytes include the ransom note and other elements of the malware's configuration described as follows (e.g., processes to terminate, files to ignore).
The first 0x60 bytes of the decompressed configuration are shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Partial decompressed configuration
The first byte from Figure 6 indicates the encryption mode.
This sample is configured to encrypt using FAST mode.
Supported values are as follows:
The individual bytes from offset 0x02 to offset 0x15 in Figure 6 are Boolean values that dictate the malware's behavior.
The malware takes the actions listed in Table 2 based on these values.
Table 2 also identifies features that are enabled or disabled for the current sample.
Perform UAC bypass if necessary
Feature not used but results in the following strings being decrypted:
Feature not used; related to these strings: "backup" and "here_backups"
Feature not used: related to these strings: "sql" and "sqlite"
Feature not used; related to a buffer that contains the repeated string "blah"
If the malware does not have elevated privileges, it attempts to perform one of two User Account Control (UAC) bypasses based on the operating system (OS) version.
If the OS is older than Windows 10, the malware uses a documented slui.exe file handler hijack technique.
This involves setting the registry value HKCU\Software\Classes\exefile\shell\open\command\Default to the malware path and executing slui.exe using the verb "runas."
If the OS version is Windows 10 or newer, the malware attempts a UAC bypass that uses the CMSTPLUA COM interface.
The decrypted strings listed in Figure 7 are used to perform this technique.
Figure 7: Decrypted UAC bypass strings
The malware generates a pseudo-random file extension based on a MAC address on the system.
In a DARKSIDE version observed in May 2021, the file extension is generated using a MachineGuid registry value as a seed rather than the MAC address.
The file extension consists of eight lowercase hexadecimal characters (e.g., ".e98fc8f7") and is referred to as <ransom_ext>.
The file extension generation algorithm has been recreated in Python.
If logging is enabled, the malware creates the log file LOG<ransom_ext>.TXT in its current directory.
The malware supports the command line argument "-path," which allows an attacker to specify a directory to target for encryption.
The sample analyzed for this report is not configured to perform a system language check.
If this functionality were enabled and the check succeeded, the string "This is a Russian-Speaking System, Exit" would be written to the log file and the malware would exit.
The malware locates and empties Recycle Bins on the system.
If the process is running under WOW64, it executes the PowerShell command in Figure 8 using CreateProcess to delete volume shadow copies.
powershell -ep bypass -c "(0..61)|%{$s+=[char][byte]('0x'+'4765742D576D694F626A6563742057696E33325F536861646F7763
			6F7079207C20466F72456163682D4F626A656374207B245F2E44656C65746528293B7D20'.Substring(2*$_,2))};iex $s"
Figure 8: Encoded PowerShell command
The decoded command from Figure 4 is "Get-WmiObject Win32_Shadowcopy | ForEach-Object {$_.Delete();}."
If the malware is not running under WOW64, it uses COM objects and WMI commands to delete volume shadow copies.
The decrypted strings in Figure 9 are used to facilitate this process.
root/cimv2
			SELECT * FROM Win32_ShadowCopy
			Win32_ShadowCopy.ID='%s'
Figure 9: Decrypted strings related to shadow copy deletion
Any service the name of which contains one of the strings listed in Figure 10 is stopped and deleted.
vss
			sql
			svc$
			memtas
			mepocs
			sophos
			veeam
			backup
The version observed in May 2021 is additionally configured to stop and delete services containing the strings listed in Figure 11.
GxVss
			GxBlr
			GxFWD
			GxCVD
			GxCIMgr
Figure 11: Additional service-related strings in May version
Any process name containing one of the strings listed in Figure 12 is terminated.
Based on its configuration, the malware targets fixed and removable disks as well as network shares.
Some processes may be terminated so associated files can be successfully encrypted.
However, the malware does not terminate processes listed in Figure 13.
vmcompute.exe
			vmms.exe
			vmwp.exe
			svchost.exe
			TeamViewer.exe
			explorer.exe
Figure 13: Processes not targeted for termination
The malware uses the strings listed in Figure 14 to ignore certain directories during the encryption process.
windows
			appdata
			application data
			boot
			google
			mozilla
			program files
			program files (x86)
			programdata
			system volume information
			tor browser
			windows.old
			intel
			msocache
			perflogs
			x64dbg
			public
			all users
			default
Figure 14: Strings used to ignore directories
The files listed in Figure 15 are ignored.
The version observed in May 2021 is additionally configured to ignore the files listed in Figure 16.
autorun.inf
			boot.ini
			bootfont.bin
			bootsect.bak
			desktop.ini
			iconcache.db
			ntldrntuser.dat
			ntuser.dat
			logntuser.ini
			thumbs.db
Figure 16: Additional ignored files in May version
Additional files are ignored based on the extensions listed in Figure 17.
Figure 17: Ignored file extensions
Files are encrypted using Salsa20 and a key randomly generated using RtlRandomEx.
Each key is encrypted using the embedded RSA-1024 public key.
The malware writes the ransom note shown in Figure 18 to README<ransom_ext>.TXT files written to directories it traverses.
----------- [ Welcome to Dark ] ------------->
----------------------------------------------
			Your computers and servers are encrypted, backups are deleted.
We use strong encryption algorithms, so you cannot decrypt your data.
But you can restore everything by purchasing a special program from us - universal decryptor.
This program will restore all your network.
Follow our instructions below and you will recover all your data.
Data leak
			----------------------------------------------
			First of all we have uploaded more then 100 GB data.
Example of data:
			 - Accounting data
			 - Executive data
			 - Sales data
			 - Customer Support data
			 - Marketing data
			 - Quality data
			 - And more other...
Your personal leak page: http://darksidedxcftmqa[.
]onion/blog/article/id/6/<REDACTED>
			The data is preloaded and will be automatically published if you do not pay.
After publication, your data will be available for at least 6 months on our tor cdn servers.
We are ready:
			- To provide you the evidence of stolen data
			- To give you universal decrypting tool for all encrypted files.
- To delete all the stolen data.
----------------------------------------------
			We value our reputation.
If we do not do our work and liabilities, nobody will pay us.
This is not in our interests.
All our decryption software is perfectly tested and will decrypt your data.
We will also provide support in case of problems.
We guarantee to decrypt one file for free.
Go to the site and contact us.
How to get access on website?
----------------------------------------------
			Using a TOR browser:
			1) Download and install TOR browser from this site: https://torproject.org/
			2) Open our website: http://darksidfqzcuhtk2[.
When you open our website, put the following data in the input form:
			Key:
			<REDACTED>
DO NOT MODIFY or try to RECOVER any files yourself.
We WILL NOT be able to RESTORE them.
We use strong encryption algorithms, so you cannot decrypt your data.\r\nBut you can restore everything by purchasing a special program from us - universal decryptor.
If we do not do our work and liabilities, nobody will pay us.
This is not in our interests.\r\nAll our decryption software is perfectly tested and will decrypt your data.
We will also provide support in case of problems.\r\nWe guarantee to decrypt one file for free.
Go to the site and contact us.\r\n\r\nHow to get access on website?
\r\n----------------------------------------------\r\nUsing a TOR browser:\r\n1) Download and install TOR browser from this site: https://torproject.org/\r\n2) Open our website: http://darksidfqzcuhtk2[.
]onion/<REDACTED>\r\n\r\nWhen you open our website, put the following data in the input form:\r\nKey:\r\<REDACTED>\r\n\r\n!!!
!\r\nDO NOT MODIFY or try to RECOVER any files yourself.
We WILL NOT be able to RESTORE them.
The following YARA rules are not intended to be used on production systems or to inform blocking rules without first being validated through an organization's own internal testing processes to ensure appropriate performance and limit the risk of false positives.
These rules are intended to serve as a starting point for hunting efforts to identify related activity; however, they may need adjustment over time if the malware family changes.
Figure 20: DARKSIDE YARA rule
Figure 21: DARKSIDE Dropper YARA rule
Figure 22: Custom Command and Control (C3) YARA rule
FireEye products detect this activity at multiple stages of the attack lifecycle.
The following table contains specific detections intended to identify and prevent malware and methods seen at these intrusions.
For brevity, this list does not include FireEye’s existing detections for BEACON, BloodHound/SharpHound, and other common tools and malware that FireEye has observed both in this campaign and across a broad range of intrusion operations
Network Security
			Email Security
			Detection On Demand
			Malware Analysis
			File Protect
Organizations can validate their security controls using the following actions with Mandiant Security Validation.
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #2
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #3
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #4
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #5
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #6
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #7
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #8
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #9
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #10
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #11
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #12
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #13
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #14
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #15
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #16
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #17
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #18
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #19
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #20
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #21
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #22
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #23
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #24
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #25
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #26
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #27
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #28
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #29
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #30
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #31
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #32
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #33
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #34
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #35
Malicious File Transfer - DARKSIDE, Download, Variant #36
Malicious File Transfer - NGROK, Download, Variant #1
Malicious File Transfer - UNC2465, LNK Downloader for SMOKEDHAM, Download
Malicious File Transfer - BEACON, Download, Variant #3
Data Exfiltration - RCLONE, Exfil Over SFTP
Malicious File Transfer - RCLONE, Download, Variant #2
Command and Control - DARKSIDE, DNS Query, Variant #1
Command and Control - DARKSIDE, DNS Query, Variant #2
Application Vulnerability - SonicWall, CVE-2021-20016, SQL Injection
Protected Theater - DARKSIDE, PsExec Execution
Host CLI - DARKSIDE, Windows Share Creation
Protected Theater - DARKSIDE, Delete Volume Shadow Copy
