
Dell SecureWorks Counter Threat Unit(TM) (CTU) researchers investigated activities associated with Threat Group-3390[1] (TG-3390).
Analysis of TG-3390's operations, targeting, and tools led CTU researchers to assess with moderate confidence the group is located in the People's Republic of China.
The threat actors target a wide range of organizations: CTU researchers have observed TG-3390 actors obtaining confidential data on defense manufacturing projects, but also targeting other industry verticals and attacking organizations involved in international relations.
The group extensively uses long-running strategic web compromises[2] (SWCs), and relies on whitelists to deliver payloads to select victims.
In comparison to other threat groups, TG-3390 is notable for its tendency to compromise Microsoft Exchange servers using a custom backdoor and credential logger.
CTU researchers divided the threat intelligence about TG-3390 into two sections: strategic and tactical.
Strategic threat intelligence includes an assessment of the ongoing threat posed by the threat group.
Executives can use this assessment to determine how to reduce risk to their organization's mission and critical assets.
Tactical threat intelligence is based on incident response investigations and research, and is mapped to the kill chain.
Computer network defenders can use this information to reduce the time and effort associated with responding to TG-3390.
Explanations of how CTU researchers identify attribution and gauge confidence levels are available in the Appendix A.
CTU researchers assess the threat posed by a threat group by reviewing intent and capability (see Figure 1).
Threat groups pose varying threats to different organizations, and even a very capable group may pose a low threat if it does not have the intent to target a particular organization.
Threat is based on a threat group's intent and capability.
CTU researchers infer intent by aggregating observations, analyzing a threat group's activity, and placing the information in a wider context.
Like many threat groups, TG-3390 conducts strategic web compromises (SWCs), also known as watering hole attacks, on websites associated with the target organization's vertical or demographic to increase the likelihood of finding victims with relevant information.
CTU researchers assess with high confidence that TG-3390 uses information gathered from prior reconnaissance activities to selectively compromise users who visit websites under its control.
Most websites compromised by TG-3390 actors are affiliated with five types of organizations around the world:
Based on this information, CTU researchers assess that TG-3390 aims to collect defense technology and capability intelligence, other industrial intelligence, and political intelligence from governments and NGOs.
To assess attribution, CTU researchers analyze observed activity, third-party reporting, and contextual intelligence.
For the following reasons, CTU researchers assess with moderate confidence that TG-3390 has a Chinese nexus:
CTU researchers recognize that the evidence supporting this attribution is circumstantial.
It is possible that TG-3390 is false-flag operation by a threat group outside of China that is deliberately planting indications of a Chinese origin.
To assess a threat group's capability, CTU researchers analyze its resources, technical proficiency, and tradecraft.
TG-3390 has access to proprietary tools, some of which are used exclusively by TG-3390 and others that are shared among a few Chinese threat groups.
The complexity and continual development of these tools indicates a mature development process.
TG-3390 can quickly leverage compromised network infrastructure during an operation and can conduct simultaneous intrusions into multiple environments.
This ability is further demonstrated by analysis of interactions between TG-3390 operators and a target environment.
CTU researchers found no evidence of multiple operators working simultaneously against a single organization.
This efficiency of operation (a 1:1 ratio of operator to observed activity) suggests that TG-3390 can scale to conduct the maximum number of simultaneous operations.
These characteristics suggest that the threat group is well resourced and has access to a tools development team and a team focused on SWCs.
TG-3390's obfuscation techniques in SWCs complicate detection of malicious web traffic redirects.
Malware used by the threat group can be configured to bypass network-based detection; however, the threat actors rarely modify host-based configuration settings when deploying payloads.
CTU researchers have observed the threat actors installing a credential logger and backdoor on Microsoft Exchange servers, which requires a technical grasp of Internet Information Services (IIS).
TG-3390 uses older exploits to compromise targets, and CTU researchers have not observed the threat actors using zero-day exploits as of this publication.
The threat actors demonstrated the ability to adapt when reentering a network after an eviction, overcoming technical barriers constructed by network defenders.
In addition to using SWCs to target specific types of organizations, TG-3390 uses spearphishing emails to target specific victims.
CTU researchers assess with high confidence that the threat actors follow an established playbook during an intrusion.
They quickly move away from their initial access vector to hide their entry point and then target Exchange servers as a new access vector.
As of this publication, CTU researchers have not discovered how TG-3390 keeps track of the details associated with its compromised assets and credentials.
However, the threat actors' ability to reuse these assets and credentials, sometimes weeks or months after the initial compromise, indicates the group is disciplined and well organized.
After gaining access to a target network in one intrusion analyzed by CTU researchers, TG-3390 actors identified and exfiltrated data for specific projects run by the target organization, indicating that they successfully obtained the information they sought.
Data exfiltration occurred almost four weeks after the initial compromise and continued for two weeks (see Figure 2).
CTU researchers have observed TG-3390 actors using tools that are favored by multiple threat groups:
@#" shown in Figure 4, are required to interact with the web shell.
TG-3390 has used additional web shells containing similarly formatted passwords.
The following tools appear to be exclusive to TG-3390:
TG-3390 actors have also used the following publicly available tools:
Incident response engagements have given CTU researchers insight into the tactics TG-3390 employs during intrusions.
CTU researchers have not observed TG-3390 actors performing reconnaissance prior to compromising organizations.
As discussed in the Actions on objectives section, the threat actors appear to wait until they have established a foothold.
TG-3390 actors use command and control (C2) domains for extended periods of time but frequently change the domains' IP addresses.
The new IP addresses are typically on the same subnet as the previous ones.
TG-3390 is capable of using a C2 infrastructure that spans multiple networks and registrars.
The most common registrar used by the adversary is HiChina Zhicheng Technology Ltd.
The threat actors have a demonstrated ability to move from one network provider to another, using some infrastructure for extended periods of time and other domains for only a few days.
Seemingly random activity patterns in infrastructure deployment and usage, along with the ability to use a wide variety of geographically diverse infrastructure, help the threat actors avoid detection.
TG-3390 SWCs may be largely geographically independent, but the group's most frequently used C2 registrars and IP net blocks are located in the U.S.
Using a U.S.-based C2 infrastructure (see Figure 7) to compromise targets in the U.S. helps TG-3390 actors avoid geo-blocking and geo-flagging measures used in network defense.
Geolocation of TG-3390 infrastructure observed by CTU researchers.
The dark green signifies a high count of C2 registrars and IP net blocks, while the light green represents a smaller count.
The threat actors create PlugX DLL stub loaders that will run only after a specific date.
The compile dates of the samples analyzed by CTU researchers are all later than the hard-coded August 8, 2013 date, indicating that the code might be reused from previous tools.
The OwaAuth web shell is likely created with a builder, given that the PE compile time of the binary does not change between instances and the configuration fields are padded to a specific size.
The adversaries modify publicly available tools such as ASPXSpy to remove identifying characteristics that network defenders use to identify web shells.
As of this publication, CTU researchers are unsure if TG-3390 relies on weaponizers to package tools and exploits.
TG-3390 conducts SWCs or sends spearphishing emails with ZIP archive attachments.
The ZIP archives have names relevant to the targets and contain both legitimate files and malware.
One archive sample analyzed by CTU researchers contained a legitimate PDF file, a benign image of interest to targets (see Figure 8), and an HttpBrowser installer disguised as an image file.
In SWCs analyzed by CTU researchers, the threat actors added the Dean Edwards packed JavaScript code shown in Figure 9 to the end of a legitimate website's menu page.
As shown in Figure 10, the unpacked JavaScript code reveals an iframe pointing to an IP address that is hosting the exploit.
Both the redirect code on the compromised site and the exploit code appear and disappear, indicating that the adversaries add the code when they want to leverage the SWC and remove the code when it is not in use to limit the visibility of their operations.
The threat actors have evolved to whitelisting IP addresses and only delivering the exploit and payload to specific targets of interest.
CTU researchers have observed TG-3390 compromising a target organization's externally and internally accessible assets, such as an OWA server, and adding redirect code to point internal users to an external website that hosts an exploit and delivers malware.
TG-3390 actors have used Java exploits in their SWCs.
In activity analyzed by CTU researchers, TG-3390 executed the Hunter web application scanning tool against a target server running IIS.
Hunter queried the following URIs in a specific order to determine if the associated software configurations are insecure, and all queries contained the HttpClient User-Agent:
TG-3390 uses DLL side loading, a technique that involves running a legitimate, typically digitally signed, program that loads a malicious DLL.
CTU researchers have observed the threat actors employing legitimate Kaspersky antivirus variants in analyzed samples.
The DLL acts as a stub loader, which loads and executes the shell code.
The adversaries have used this technique to allow PlugX and HttpBrowser to persist on a system.
In other cases, threat actors placed web shells on externally accessible servers, sometimes behind a reverse proxy, to execute commands on the compromised system.
TG-3390 actors have deployed the OwaAuth web shell to Exchange servers, disguising it as an ISAPI filter.
The IIS w3wp.exe process loads the malicious DLL, which CTU researchers have observed in the Program Files\Microsoft\Exchange Server\ClientAccess\Owa\Bin directory.
To traverse the firewall, C2 traffic for most TG-3390 tools occurs over ports 53, 80, and 443.
The PlugX malware can be configured to use HTTP, DNS, raw TCP, or UDP to avoid network-based detection.
In one sample analyzed by CTU researchers, PlugX was configured with hard-coded user credentials to bypass a proxy that required authentication.
Newer HttpBrowser versions use SSL with self-signed certificates to encrypt network communications.
TG-3390 actors frequently change the C2 domain's A record to point to the loopback IP address 127.0.0.1, which is a variation of a technique known as "parking."
Other variations of parking point the IP address to Google's recursive name server 8.8.8.8, an address belonging to Confluence, or to other non-routable addresses.
When the adversaries' operations are live, they modify the record again to point the C2 domain to an IP address they can access.
A domain name parking example is available in Appendix D.
CTU researchers have discovered numerous details about TG-3390 operations, including how the adversaries explore a network, move laterally, and exfiltrate data.
As shown in Figure 11, after compromising an initial victim's system (patient 0), the threat actors use the Baidu search engine to search for the victim's organization name.
They then identify the Exchange server and attempt to install the OwaAuth web shell.
If the OwaAuth web shell is ineffective because the victim uses two-factor authentication for webmail, the adversaries identify other externally accessible servers and deploy ChinaChopper web shells.
Within six hours of entering the environment, the threat actors compromised multiple systems and stole credentials for the entire domain.
Timeline, in Eastern Time, of TG-3390's initial entry into a victim's network.
The threat actors use the Hunter and nbtscan tools, sometimes renamed, to conduct network reconnaissance for vulnerable servers and online systems (see Figure 12).
TG-3390 actors favor At.exe to create scheduled tasks for executing commands on remote systems.

Figure 12. nbtscan batch script (renamed ipcan.exe) used to profile network.
Over a few days' span, the threat actors install remote access tools on additional systems based upon the results of the network reconnaissance.
They use At.exe to schedule tasks to run self-extracting RAR archives, which install either HttpBrowser or PlugX.
CTU researchers observed the threat actors collecting Cisco VPN profiles to use when accessing the victim's network via VPN (see Figure 13).
To facilitate lateral movement, the adversaries deploy ASPXTool web shells to internally accessible systems running IIS.
CTU researchers have observed the threat actors encrypting data using the password "admin-windows2014" and splitting the RAR archives into parts in the recycler directory, with the same name as the uncompressed data (see Figure 14).
Batch script used to archive data.
The number at the end of the password corresponds to the year of the intrusion.
For example, the password "admin-windows2014" shown in Figure 14 was changed to "admin-windows2015" for TG-3390 intrusions conducted in 2015.
Another batch script run by a scheduled task renames the archives on the file server (see Figure 15).
Batch script used to rename exfiltrated data.
CTU researchers have observed TG-3390 actors staging RAR archives, renamed with a .zip file extension, on externally accessible web servers.
The adversaries then issue HTTP GET requests, sometimes with the User-Agent MINIXL, to exfiltrate the archive parts from the victim's network (see Figure 16).
Example GET request from IIS log.
In other intrusions, data was exfiltrated using the PlugX remote access tool.
Figure 17 shows network data transfer sizes for a month-long period beginning with TG-3390's re-entry into a network.
Approximately 300 GB of data was exfiltrated during that span.
Network data transfer sizes to C2 servers after TG-3390 reentry into a network.
Figure 18 is a UTC time wheel depicting which hours the threat actors actively operated in one target environment during a three-day intrusion observed by CTU researchers.
The concentric bands represent the days of the week, with Saturday as the outside band and Sunday as the innermost band, and each cell represents an hour.
The darker the cell color, the higher the activity level; white indicates no observed activity.
TG-3390 was most active between 04:00 and 09:00 UTC.
Mapping of TG-3390's interactions with web shells during an intrusion responded to by CTU researchers.
The legend across the bottom of the figure lists the upper bound of interactions that are represented by each color variation on the wheel.
Times are based on UTC.
Successfully evicting TG-3390 from an environment requires a coordinated plan to remove all access points, including remote access tools and web shells.
Within weeks of eviction, the threat actors attempt to access their ChinaChopper web shells from previously used IP addresses.
Finding the web shells inaccessible, the adversaries search google.co.jp for remote access solutions.
CTU researchers discovered the threat actors searching for "[company] login," which directed them to the landing page for remote access.
TG-3390 attempts to reenter the environment by identifying accounts that do not require two-factor authentication for remote access solutions, and then brute forcing usernames and passwords.
After reestablishing access, the adversaries download tools such as gsecudmp and WCE that are staged temporarily on websites that TG-3390 previously compromised but never used.
CTU researchers believe legitimate websites are used to host tools because web proxies categorize the sites as benign.
TG-3390 actors keep track of and leverage existing ASPXTool web shells in their operations, preferring to issue commands via an internally accessible web shell rather than HttpBrowser or PlugX.
After reentering an environment, the threat actors focus on obtaining the active directory contents.
Figure 19 shows a timeline of TG-3390 attempting to regain a foothold in a network in a span of only five hours.
Timeline, in Eastern Time, of TG-3390's reentry into a compromised network.
Team member or team identifier
Analysis of the OwaAuth web shell revealed a PDB string with the "SyberSpace" username (see Figure 20).
OwaAuth web shell PDB string.
Further research revealed additional tools containing the same username (see Figure 21).
PDB strings containing the 'SyberSpace' username.
CTU researchers have no evidence to determine if these tools are also used by TG-3390.
TG-3390 is known for compromising organizations via SWCs and moving quickly to install backdoors on Exchange servers.
Despite the group's proficiency, there are still many opportunities to detect and disrupt its operation by studying its modus operandi.
The threat actors work to overcome existing security controls, or those put in place during an engagement, to complete their mission of exfiltrating intellectual property.
Due to TG-3390's determination, organizations should formulate a solid eviction plan before engaging with the threat actors to prevent them from reentering the network.
The indicators in Table 1 are associated with TG-3390 activity.
The domains and IP addresses may contain malicious content, so consider the risks before opening them in a browser.
In most cases, CTU researchers not have intelligence to directly attribute a threat group, so attribution relies on circumstantial evidence and is an assessment rather than a fact.
CTU researchers draw on three distinct intelligence bases for evidence of attribution:
CTU researchers have adopted the grading system published by the U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence to indicate confidence in their assessments:
HttpBrowser is a remote access tool whose name originates from the hard-coded "HttpBrowser/1.0" User-Agent.
CTU researchers also identified a PDB string in the binaries, J:\TokenControlV3\ServerDll\Release\ServerDll.pdb, which implies that the threat actors may refer to the tool as "TokenControl."
Table 2 lists the commands available to threat actors in one of the HttpBrowser variants.
Other variants of the backdoor may include additional commands such as setcmd, settime, uninstall, and down.
Table 3 shows the unencrypted URL parameters, along with sample data and a description of the data.
OwaAuth is a web shell that is installed as an ISAPI filter on Exchange servers and shares characteristics with the ChinaChopper web shell.
Like ChinaChopper, it parses HTTP requests for the Z1 and Z2 parameters (see Table 4).
The legitimate owaauth.dll file resides in %ProgramFiles%\Microsoft\Exchange Server\ClientAccess\Owa\Auth\ while CTU researchers have observed the backdoor using the same filename in the %ProgramFiles%\Microsoft\Exchange Server\ClientAccess\Owa\bin\ directory.
In addition to acting as a web shell, the malware captures and DES-encrypts credentials before writing the username and password to disk.
The OwaAuth web shell enables a threat actor to upload and download files, launch processes, and execute SQL queries.
Each web shell instance is configured to contain SP, Key, and Log variables.
The SP variable is a string containing the victim's username.
When the malicious ISAPI filter captures a username matching this variable, it knows to handle the incoming HTTP request as a command to the web shell.
The DES key to encrypt the credentials in the configuration observed by CTU researchers is 12345678, and the log file is c:\log.txt.
The decrypted contents of the log file adhere to the format in Figure 22.
Decrypted OwaAuth log file format.
Table 4 lists the OwaAuth web shell commands available to the adversary.
OwaAuth web shell command set.
CTU researchers have observed TG-3390 parking domains by pointing their A record to a non-routable IP space, including the 127.0.0.
Table 5 demonstrates how the threat actors change one of their C2 domains to point to routable and non-routable IP addresses over time.
Example parking of trendmicro-update .
[1] The Dell SecureWorks Counter Threat Unit(TM) (CTU) research team tracks threat groups by assigning them four-digit randomized numbers (3390 in this case), and compiles information from first-hand incident response observations and from external sources.
[2] Threat groups use strategic web compromises (SWCs), also known as watering hole attacks, to target a wide array of potential victims.
Threat actors compromise a website used by their target demographic (e.g., compromising a website specializing in oil and gas industry news when targeting the energy vertical).
Visitors to the compromised website are redirected to a server under the threat group's control, where their system is compromised with the threat group's malware.
With this tactic, a threat group increases the likelihood of compromising systems that possess desired information.
