We offer flexibility to our customers with a full set of deployment and purchasing options.
We offer flexibility to our customers with a full set of deployment and purchasing options.
It was the best of times; it was the worst of times.
While Russian advanced persistent threat (APT) activity against the US and other international organizations has dominated the headlines recently, Chinese APT actors have been active outside the limelight.
Chinese efforts against the European consumer drone company appear to be economically motivated and represent a deviation from the September 2015 agreement between the U.S. and China to disavow economic espionage.
Due to their involvement with the U.S. military, it could be argued targeting the energy management company was for military intelligence and not economic espionage.
Using the Diamond Model of Intrusion Analysis, we will start by walking through the technical axis of the attack where we found malware used by multiple Chinese APTs calling back to a domain with the same registrant as those used in the 2015 Anthem and OPM breaches.
We’ll pivot to the socio-political axis of the attack, and discuss how the victims fit the targeting profile of at least one Chinese APT – although we are unable to attribute the attack to a specific Chinese APT at this time.
On June 08, 2016 ThreatConnect identified a malicious executable MD5: 3BEA073FA50B62C561CEDD9619CD8425.
This malware is a variant of “HttpBrowser,” a backdoor used by multiple Chinese APTs, including EMISSARY PANDA (aka APT27/TG-3390) and DYNAMITE PANDA (aka APT18/Wekby/TG-0416).
Some reports refer to HttpBrowser as the GTalk trojan or “Token Control.” According to TrendMicro, HttpBrowser allows a threat actor to spawn a reverse shell, upload or download files, and capture keystrokes on a compromised system, similar to other remote administration tools (RATs).
Antivirus detection for HttpBrowser is extremely low and typically based upon heuristic signatures.
The report also indicates HttpBrowser is not available on underground markets.
The malware sends system information using the query string “computer=<COMPUTER NAME>&lanip=<LAN IP>&uid=<Unique ID>&os=<OS VERSION>&relay=<RELAY NUMBER>&data=<DATA>”
Leveraging ThreatConnect’s WHOIS function, we identified the malware’s hardcoded command and control domain adobesys[.
]com was registered by the Chinese domain reseller and mass registrant, li2384826402[@]yahoo[.]com.
This email address is infamous for registering domains used in the DEEP PANDA-attributed Anthem and OPM attacks in 2015, and provides additional evidence tying this HttpBrowser activity to Chinese APT actors.
Using ThreatConnect’s Farsight Passive DNS integration, we can identify the adobesys[.
]com domain was hosted at two IP addresses — 173.231.11[.
]81 — while the domain most likely was operational.
]com, was hosted at the 185.92.222[.
]81 IP during the same timeframe as adobesys[.]com.
WHOIS information indicates that newsoft2[.
]com was also registered by a Chinese registrant (omyname@gmail[.
]com), and its co-location with the malicious adobesys[.
]com domain suggests that it may be operated by the same actors behind the HttpBrowser activity.
Indicators from this activity have been shared in incident 20151228A: Chinese HttpBrowser Activity Targeting European Companies.
We provided a lead on the malware and adobesys[.
]com to a partner, who collected associated network traffic and worked with us to analyze the activity.
In this case, the activity was targeted against only a few companies.
We determined the Chinese actors used the “HttpBrowser” backdoor variant to target a control systems engineer in product development at a European consumer drone company.
The traffic also helped us identify another target: the U.S. subsidiary of a French energy management company that has contracts with the U.S. Department of Defense and other U.S. government elements to implement energy management and SCADA solutions.
Both organizations were alerted to this activity shortly after it was discovered.
At this time, we have no indication what, if any, data was stolen from them.
Download Our Whitepaper - Fragmentation: The Silent Killer of Your Security Management Program
While we cannot state for certain which Chinese APT is behind this activity, targeting a consumer drone company and energy management company is most consistent with previous EMISSARY PANDA targeting.
Both EMISSARY and DYNAMITE PANDA have previously targeted the defense and aerospace industries, among others; however, EMISSARY PANDA is the only one of the two known to have targeted energy companies.
According to the Secureworks report, EMISSARY PANDA commonly conducts strategic web compromises (SWCs), also known as watering hole attacks, on websites associated with the target organization’s industry to increase the likelihood of compromising victims with relevant information.
EMISSARY PANDA also uses spearphishing emails to target specific victims.
At this time we do not know whether SWCs or spearphishing emails were used to target the victim organizations.
The HttpBrowser sample piqued our interest since the information security community has had a heightened focus on whether or not Beijing is abiding by the September 2015 agreement between U.S. and China to disavow economic espionage.
The U.S. subsidiary of the French energy management company looks like an artful dodge.
These dual use organizations – those that possess significant intellectual property and are also involved with the U.S. government – present tempting targets for China that could facilitate a variety of espionage efforts.
However, China could claim such activity constitutes military espionage and therefore does not violate the agreement between Presidents Obama and Xi from last September.
By contrast, targeting the European civilian drone maker looks like a case of economically motivated espionage.
The world’s largest and most popular drone manufacturer is China’s DaJiang Innovation Technology (DJI), which currently holds about 70% of the commercial drone market share and was valued at over $10 billion in May 2015.
The emerging global market for business services using commercial drones was recently valued at over $127 billion due to the growing applicability of drones across industries including agriculture, mapping, and surveillance.
In this instance, China most likely is seeking to quash any competition posed to DJI’s command of the market.
With access to the targeted company’s intellectual property, sensitive communications, and product roadmap, China could provide its favored companies with economic advantages such as:
While Chinese cyber-enabled economic espionage may be less pronounced, it almost certainly hasn’t ended and likely has evolved to help solidify leading market shares.
In some ways, solidifying the dominant Chinese firm in a market feels like the next chapter in economic espionage.
The overarching storyline of China’s economic espionage has been targeting strategic industries and allowing China to catch up with established champions.
Chinese APT efforts against American Steel manufacturers likely facilitated the rise in Chinese world steel production from about 15% in 2000 to 50% in 2015.
China may be attempting to avoid the ire of the U.S. government as it targets organizations that are headquartered elsewhere.
Furthermore, China may also be attempting to be more efficient as it focuses collection on organizations that meet multiple intelligence requirements.
Targeting such organizations could allow China to explain away their activity as non-economic espionage, thereby adhering (with their fingers crossed) to the Rose Garden agreement.
ThreatConnect is the only security platform with comprehensive intelligence, analytics, automation, orchestration, and workflow capabilities native within a single solution.
With ThreatConnect, you will be able to increase accuracy and efficiency, improve collaboration of teams and technology,  strengthen business-security goal alignment, and build a single source of truth for your entire security team.
Suite 550
Arlington, VA 22203
Directions
Toll Free: +1.800.965.2708
Local: +1.703.229.4240
Fax: +1.703.229.4489
By Industry
By Role
By Need
How to Buy
About
Leadership
Methodology
Research Team
Careers
Learn More
Knowledge Base
Github Repository
15 Bishopsgate
London, EC2N 3AR
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 208 138 8482
Bloc F, Etaj 1
The Office
Bulevardul 21 Decembrie 1989
400124
Cluj Napoca
Romania
©2012- 2021 ThreatConnect, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy | Sitemap | Terms of Service
To give you the easiest possible experience, this site uses cookies.
Find out more about our Privacy Policy and Cookie Policy.
By continuing to use this site, you are giving us your consent to do this.
We may request cookies to be set on your device.
We use cookies to let us know when you visit our websites, how you interact with us, to enrich your user experience, and to customize your relationship with our website.
Click on the different category headings to find out more.
You can also change some of your preferences.
Note that blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience on our websites and the services we are able to offer.
These cookies are strictly necessary to provide you with services available through our website and to use some of its features.
Because these cookies are strictly necessary to deliver the website, refuseing them will have impact how our site functions.
You always can block or delete cookies by changing your browser settings and force blocking all cookies on this website.
But this will always prompt you to accept/refuse cookies when revisiting our site.
We fully respect if you want to refuse cookies but to avoid asking you again and again kindly allow us to store a cookie for that.
You are free to opt out any time or opt in for other cookies to get a better experience.
If you refuse cookies we will remove all set cookies in our domain.
We provide you with a list of stored cookies on your computer in our domain so you can check what we stored.
Due to security reasons we are not able to show or modify cookies from other domains.
You can check these in your browser security settings.
We also use different external services like Google Webfonts, Google Maps, and external Video providers.
Since these providers may collect personal data like your IP address we allow you to block them here.
Please be aware that this might heavily reduce the functionality and appearance of our site.
Changes will take effect once you reload the page.
Vimeo and Youtube video embeds:
