Simplify threat detection and response with FireEye XDR.
A global network of support experts available 24x7.
We offer simple and flexible support programs to maximize the value of your FireEye products and services.
Access for our registered Partners to help you be successful with FireEye.
Collateral, deal registration, request for funds, training, enablement, and more.
Read our digital magazine providing expert-authored stories, information, unique insights, and advice on cyber security.

To give you the best possible experience, this site uses cookies.
Find out more on how we use cookies.Accept
This blog post details the post-compromise tradecraft and operational tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) of a Chinese espionage group we track as UNC215.
While UNC215’s targets are located throughout the Middle East, Europe, Asia, and North America, this report focuses on intrusion activity primarily observed at Israeli entities.
In early 2019, Mandiant began identifying and responding to intrusions in the Middle East by Chinese espionage group UNC215.
These intrusions exploited the Microsoft SharePoint vulnerability CVE-2019-0604 to install web shells and FOCUSFJORD payloads at targets in the Middle East and Central Asia.
There are targeting and high level technique overlaps with between UNC215 and APT27, but we do not have sufficient evidence to say that the same actor is responsible for both sets of activity.
APT27 has not been seen since 2015, and UNC215 is targeting many of the regions that APT27 previously focused on; however, we have not seen direct connection or shared tools, so we are only able to assess this link with low confidence.
In addition to data from Mandiant Incident Response and FireEye telemetry, we worked with Israeli defense agencies to review data from additional compromises of Israeli entities.
This analysis showed multiple, concurrent operations against Israeli government institutions, IT providers and telecommunications entities beginning in January 2019.
During this time, UNC215 used new TTPs to hinder attribution and detection, maintain operational security, employ false flags, and leverage trusted relationships for lateral movement.
We believe this adversary is still active in the region.
Between 2019 and 2020, Mandiant responded to several incidents where Microsoft SharePoint vulnerability CVE-2019-0604 was used to deliver web shells, and then FOCUSFJORD payloads to select government and academic targets in the Middle East and Central Asia.
After gaining initial access, the operators conduct credential harvesting and extensive internal network reconnaissance.
This includes running native Windows commands on compromised servers, executing ADFind on the Active Directory, and scanning the internal network with numerous publicly available tools and a non-public scanner we named WHEATSCAN.
The operators made a consistent effort to delete these tools and remove any residual forensic artifacts from compromised systems.
In another incident response investigation, UNC215 pivoted to multiple OWA servers and installed web shells.
In the following days, the operators interacted with these web shells from internal IP addresses, attempting to harvest credentials.
After identifying key systems within the target network, such as domain controllers and Exchange servers, UNC215 moved laterally and deployed their signature malware FOCUSFJORD.
UNC215 often uses FOCUSFJORD for the initial stages of an intrusion, and then later deploys HYPERBRO, which has more information collection capabilities such as screen capture and keylogging.
While UNC215 heavily relies on the custom tools FOCUSFJORD and HYPERBRO, Chinese espionage groups often have resource sharing relationships with other groups, and we do not have enough information to determine if these tools are developed and used exclusively by UNC215.
Reducing Forensic Evidence on Disk
UNC215 consistently cleaned up evidence of their intrusion after gaining access to a system.
This type of action can make it more difficult for incident responders to reconstruct what happened during a compromise.
UNC215 leveraged trusted third parties in a 2019 operation targeting an Israeli government network.
As illustrated in Figure 2, the operators were able to access their primary target via RDP connections from a trusted third party using stolen credentials and used this access to deploy and remotely execute FOCUSFJORD on their primary target.

Figure 2: Two FOCUSFJORD samples configured to proxy C2 traffic
UNC215 made technical modifications to their tools to limit outbound network traffic and used other victim networks to proxy their C2 instructions, likely to minimize the risk of detection and blend in with normal network traffic.
The following are examples of HYPERBRO and FOCUSFJORD samples capable of acting as proxies to relay communications to their C2 servers.
We do not have enough context about the following samples to attribute all of them to UNC215, though they are representative of activity we have seen from the group.
While hunting for FOCUSFJORD samples, we found a sample of a new malware (MD5: 625dd9048e3289f19670896cf5bca7d8) that shares code with FOCUSFJORD, but is distinct.
However, analysis indicates that it only contains functions to relay communications between another FOCUSFJORD instance and a C2 server (Figure 2, Network A).
We suspect this type of malware was used in the aforementioned operation.
The actors stripped out unnecessary FOCUSFJORD capabilities, possibly to reduce the likelihood it would be detected by security controls.
Figure 3 contains the data structure as it is being sent from a FOCUSFJORD sample configured to communicate with another FOCUSFJORD victim.

Figure 3: Two FOCUSFJORD samples configured to proxy C2 traffic
We have observed numerous variants of the FOCUSFJORD malware family since 2017.
The authors have added new communications protocols, an updated loading mechanism, and expanded the number of supported configurations in newer versions.
Version numbers indicate that the malware undergoes frequent changes and maybe supported by a team of developers.
Many of these variants contain or remove functionality depending on the operator’s unique requirements at the time, which may suggest that multiple operators have access to the source code or a builder, or that a close relationship exists between the developers and operators.
FOCUSFJORD samples can be configured with up to 13 unique registry values which allow operators to control and organize compromised hosts.
In addition to specifying details related to the loading and persistence mechanisms and C2 communications, there are two keys which allow the operator to add additional context about the victim:
It is not clear how or if UNC215 uses these configuration parameters to organize and track large numbers of compromised hosts.
We observed different console values within the same network, identical console values using different C2 addresses, and identical console values targeting different countries.
Some FOCUSFJORD samples from 2018 and 2020 use the same console values despite the significant gap in time (See Table 1).
Table 1: FOCUSFJORD comparison (note: the * entries are from public reporting and have not been verified by Mandiant)
Artifacts in UNC215 campaigns often contain foreign language strings that do not match the country being targeted and may be intended to mislead an analyst examining the malware.
Additionally, on at least three occasions, UNC215 employed a custom tool associated with Iranian actors whose source code was leaked.
The use of Farsi strings, filepaths containing /Iran/, and web shells publicly associated with Iranian APT groups may have been intended to mislead analysts and suggest an attribution to Iran.
Notably, in 2019 the government of Iran accused APT27 of attacking its government networks and released a detection and removal tool for HYPERBRO malware.
While UNC215 prioritizes evading detection within a compromised network, Mandiant identified several examples of code, C2 infrastructure, and certificate reuse indicating that UNC215 operators are less concerned about defenders’ ability to track and detect UNC215 activity.
Mandiant attributes this campaign to Chinese espionage operators which we track as UNC215 a Chinese espionage operation that has been suspected of targeting organizations around the world since at least 2014.
We have low confidence that UNC215 is associated with APT27.
UNC215 has compromised organizations in the government, technology, telecommunications, defense, finance, entertainment, and health care sectors.
The group targets data and organizations which are of great interest to Beijing's financial, diplomatic, and strategic objectives.
The activity detailed in this post demonstrates China’s consistent strategic interest in the Middle East.
This cyber espionage activity is happening against the backdrop of China’s multi-billion-dollar investments related to the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and its interest in Israeli’s robust technology sector.
OS Credential Dumping: LSASS Memory
Remote Services: Remote Desktop Protocol
Process Injection: Thread Execution Hijacking
Command and Scripting Interpreter: PowerShell
Command and Scripting Interpreter: Windows Command Shell
Indicator Removal on Host: File Deletion
Indicator Removal on Host: Timestomp
Application Layer Protocol: Web Protocols
Server Software Component: Web Shell
Create or Modify System Process: Windows Service
Boot or Logon Autostart Execution: Registry Run Keys / Startup Folder
Subvert Trust Controls: Code Signing
Inter-Process Communication: Dynamic Data Exchange
Hijack Execution Flow: DLL Side-Loading
Acquire Infrastructure: Virtual Private Server
Obtain Capabilities: Code Signing Certificates
Stage Capabilities: Install Digital Certificate
The following indicators have been seen in use with the noted malware families, but not all have been confirmed to be used by UNC215.
FireEye detects this activity across our platforms.
Get email updates as new blog posts are added.
Cette page est également disponible en français.
Diese Seite ist auch auf Deutsch verfügbar
해당 페이지는 한글 버전으로 보실 수 있습니다
Continue viewing this page in English
Privacy & Cookies Policy | Legal Documentation
