Peter and I have been busy planning for CanSecWest in a week.
The course, Advanced Memory Forensics in Incident Response, is constantly evolving.
It has been about a year and a half since Memoryze was released, and just over a year for Audit Viewer.
Honestly, it seems a lot longer, but that is not a bad thing.
This week my team will be handing over to QA Windows 2003 64-bit support.
While that is in testing, Peter will be making improvements to Audit Viewer that you the user have recommended, and he will be verifying everything works correctly with the 64-bit output.
The Malware Rating Index (MRI), which is in Audit Viewer, really changes the case studies in the training.
For some exercises, we have to turn MRI off because the malware becomes obvious if you know how to use the tool.
I expect MRI will evolve a lot over the next six months as we think of news ways to visualize, sort, and search the data as well as identify new pieces of data to collect.
If you are curious how visualization and sorting can help, check out how Harlan Carvey and Chris Pogue use it.
We have gotten a lot of great feedback from the user community, but what Windows operating system support or feature would you like see next?
Yes, MANDIANT Intelligent Response has a roadmap, but Memoryze allows us to play a little bit.
It is really a labor of love.
So let us know what you think.
You can reach us at peter.silberman or james.butler plus company name.com.
We currently support:
Windows 2000 SP4
Windows XP SP2 and SP3
Windows Vista SP1 and SP2 (better installer coming in next release)
Windows 2003 SP1 and SP2
Windows 2003 SP2 64-bit (** next release **)
So if you cannot make the training at CanSecWest in a week, Black Hat USA has just opened their training schedule, and we will be there for the weekend and weekday offerings of Advanced Memory Forensics in Incident Response.
I hope to see you soon.
Keep your eyes open for official update releases of Memoryze/Audit Viewer and Webinars/presentations.
