For those who are not on our mailing list for Memoryze or Audit Viewer, we released a new version a little over a week ago.
The new version of the software includes all of the memory analysis features that are available in the newly released MANDIANT Intelligent Response (MIR) 1.4.
So what is included in Memoryze and Audit Viewer 1.4?
Well, here is the short of it.
Support for Windows 2003 x64 SP2
Improved support of Vista SP1 and SP2 including port enumeration and a better installer
Enumeration of digital signatures for all loaded modules in a processes' address space, hooked and hooking drivers, and all drivers found by driver signature scans
Enumeration of MD5/SHA1/SHA256 hash on disk for all loaded modules in a process' address space and all drivers found by driver signature scans
Single installer for 64-bit and 32-bit versions
Improvements to the Malware Rating Index (MRI)
Report visualization of MRI results
MRI rule editors that will allow users to graphically edit the MRI rule file
Handle Trust view to help identify suspicious handles
Ability to search results within a specific process
Multi-select with copy
Multi-select and export to a CSV file
Those who attended the CanSecWest Training in March have already been enjoying many of these features in beta form for months, and we are committed to ensuring that those who attend the Advanced Memory Forensics in Incident Response class at Black Hat will get early access to the next version of Memorzye, which will support Windows 7 64-bit.
As for the Black Hat training, there is a lot of new and updated content for 2010.
Coverage of 64-bit operating systems
New section on malware covering different malware techniques and how they stand out in memory
Four new case studies ranging from real Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) incidents, to spear phishing attacks, and everything in between
Student receive early access Memoryze and Audit Viewer for Windows 7 64-bit
Students receive the only free tool to analyze Windows Vista
Students receive the only free tool to analyze Windows 2003 64-bit
Better data collection to help identify processes and drivers as malicious or not
Added the Malware Rating Index (MRI), which helps automatically identify many malware behaviors discussed in the class.
Through a simple user interface, students learn how to write rules to identify malware in their own work environments.
MRI then uses those rules to score processes as suspicious or not.
I would like to thank James Long who pointed out an issue with the batch scripts* and Peter Villadsen who worked so hard to improve the build process and installation for Memoryze.
Peter and I would also like to thank all our loyal users.
We appreciate all your feedback, and we hope to see you in Las Vegas.
* When specifying an output directory from the command line with the batch scripts in Memoryze, the directory must already exist.
