This Thursday, July 15th at 1PM EDT, Christopher Glyer and I will be presenting MANDIANT's State of the Hack webinar titled "M-Trends - State of Remediation."
Many of you probably already know Christopher.
He's delivered two separate webinars, including a previous State of the Hack titled "Silent But Deadly" and "Fresh Prints: Choose Your Own Adventure."
These webinars gave you more information about the Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) and provided a detailed look into the malware used by this attacker.
However, one area that we haven't discussed is how to remediate the APT once detected.
As a result, we have assembled a team of incident responders to create a list of the most common and generally applicable remediation strategies we've developed over the past year.
These remediation strategies build on our previous webinars and M-Trends report to provide guidance on how to protect against phishing attacks, limitlateral movement, disrupt C2 communications and facilitate investigation of future attacks.
If you haven't had the opportunity to listen to our previous webinars and read the M-Trends report, I'd encourage you to do so as it will provide some additional background to Thursday's webinar.
You can find the listing of previous webinars on our website under the News & Events section.
To request a copy of M-Trends, simply click here.
Together, Christopher and I will draw on our experience as consultants over the last 10 years to discuss common problems we consistently see at client sites.
We will offer remediation solutions, define associated implementation challenges, and discuss a few case studies where we've witnessed clients successfully execute our recommendations.
Although we'll only be providing a subset of the hundreds of recommendations we've made, Christopher and I will be more than happy to field specific questions related to your environment.
I hope you can join us for the webinar this Thursday.
There will be plenty of good recommendations, excellent discussion, and a picture of me in jail.
For more information, and to register, click here.
