There are two general ways a complex problem can be solved, using a good approach or a bad one.
The only good thing about the bad approach is that it will usually be simpler to understand and implement, but in the long run one will find that shortcuts don't always work.
The good thing with most humans is that they learn from their mistakes and move forward.
This is what we are seeing happen at the moment within the anti-malware industry.
Host based anti-virus products are shifting their focus from signature based detection to advanced behavioral analysis and memory forensics.
Network based sensors which used to rely heavily on DNS and IP black lists for detecting phishing attacks, SPAM emails and botnet command and controls are moving towards advanced protocol analysis and emulation.
The purpose of this series is to discuss limitations and challenges involved in using black lists (DNS & IP) for network based anomaly detections.
I will focus more on the problems of tracking botnets using their control server identities alone.
I will also discuss if there are better techniques available to detect compromised (botted) machines and terminate CnC channels to prevent further damage.
Catch me if you can.
Bot herders are well aware that their botnets can easily be identified and destroyed if they don't switch their CnC servers for an extended period of time.
The shutdown of McColo crippled the world's largest spam botnets in one go because they were not moving their CnCs quickly.
Today, bot herders have learnt their lesson, the average life span of a CnC domain is very short, sometimes not more than a few days.
Hence the continuous effort to update your blacklist is a race condition in which the bad guys will always be one step ahead.
Here are some statistics from FireEye's Malware Analysis & Exchange (MAX) network, showing how quickly bot herders of the top botnets switch their command and control servers.
CnC servers found to be active during last 10 days.
These domains were discovered without prior knowledge and result from seeing huge traffic samples across many networks.
These CnCs quickly emerge and disappear.
Bot herders keep moving to the next CnC when they see the old ones on publicly available black lists.
Let's take another example.
Zeus Tracker is a well known on-line resource which is dedicated to hunting Zeus command and control servers.
As of today high level statistics from Zeus Tracker are as follows:
