We are on a roll with our freeware.
The latest version of Redline is now available!
For those who are not familiar with Redline - you may be asking, what is it?
Simply put, Redline brings together analysis tools which help you perform a guided investigation of a potentially compromised system.
And did we mention that it is free?
This latest and greatest version of Redline includes some awesome new features, courtesy of recommendations from our strong and growing user base and input from internal users here at Mandiant.
For those who have been loyal Redline users, you will find that it is no longer just a memory forensics tool!
It has grown into a multi-purpose product for creating Indicators of Compromise (IOC) and matching them across all types of host data, while maintaining all the traditional memory forensics capabilities that you're used to.
With Redline, you can now include and search for Indicators of Compromise and create a searchable report detailing any suspicious activity found matching those IOCs.
Need more on what IOCs are?
Click here for more information.
Specify a set of IOCsbefore collection and Redline will now help tailor the configuration to provide meaningful search resultsand ensure that all the data required by the chosen IOCs is collected, speeding up your time to completion.
Not sure if the IOCs you have chosen are the ones you want?
Not to worry!
When choosing indicators to search for, there is now a handy preview window to see the detailed information of each indicator.
You are no longer limited to just memory data.
Redline now enables you to configure and collect a much broader range of data about the target host, such as event logs and file listings.
This data will in turn be searchable using the new Indicator of Compromise search options, providing you with better overall search results.
With Redline you can now perform investigations while searching for indicators - at the same time!
For example, while the session is still matching IOCs, you can start diving into the Malware Risk Indicator (MRI) Scores and start anew investigation or even continue an existing investigation.
Now there's no guessing where you are in the process.
You can check the progress of your investigation at any time via "Background Tasks" in the main menu.
You will also receive a notification when one of your background tasks has been scheduled.
For our current users, be sure to upgrade to this latest version of Redline to take advantage of the new features.
For new users, don't wait another minute to download Redline and get your hands on this great set of analysis tools.
