So far, in working with Redline™ 1.5, I have uncovered a few interesting bits above and beyond what we discussed in the last Fresh Prints of Mal-ware: IOCing Red webinar.
I would like to share that with you today, and discuss a recent Google+ Hangout we conducted on the topic of Redline and Indicators of Compromise (IOCs).
We have talked about the portable agent feature of Redline once or twice in passing.
This is not a new feature of Redline but, with this latest release it provides a lot more value since Redline can audit registries and file systems in addition to performing memory analysis.Previously you would have had to use IOC Finder or Mandiant Intelligent Response®(MIRTM) for registry and file system audits.
When you create a portable agent in Redline it creates a set of audit scripts that allow you to run the MIR agent on a different box from where Redline is running to collect audit information about that particular host.
This makes it possible to use Redline in real investigations without having to install the free tool on the boxes you are investigating.
We recommend doing this via physical access to the box and putting the portable agent on removable media.
You can do this via remote execution tools (such as psexec), Active Directory mechanisms, or other standard enterprise deployment methods -- but be aware that if a machine is compromised, any accounts that interact with that machine could be compromised as well.
If you really need this functionality across your enterprise, that is one of the things we address with our Mandiant Intelligent Response product line.
The how to create a portable agent is covered in depth in the Redline User Guide.
It is very similar to the way you create audits for local auditing.
It just begins ata different starting point.
Instead of clicking on a link in the splash screen, start with the Redline icon at the top left-hand side of the screen once you have Redline fired up.
If you click on this icon, you will see a menu drop down.
Look for the USB stick icon and an option to "Create a Portable Agent for Analyzing Other Computer."
Once you click the "Create Portable Agent" option, it will take you into a wizard similar to what I outlined in my previous blog post.
However, at the end of the selection processes, instead of running locally on your machine, you will have selected a directory to create the portable agent in, and you will find a set of scripts there that you can put on removable media and take to any number of hosts to run the script on.
Once you are done running the portable agent, you will have directories full of audit data (if using something like a USB stick, obviously direct the output back to that piece of removable media -- and make sure that you will have enough space on the media you are using!
A full audit of a 64-bit Win7 host can fill several Gigs.).
You can then open those audits once you have transferred them back to your Redline workstation by selecting "From a Memoryze Output Directory" from the main splash screen.
One specific pro-tip I have for using portable agents is even if you are using Redline just for testing or experimentation, in version 1.5, portable agents seem to run much faster than the "Analyze This Machine" option.
Therefore, I have taken to using portable agents for all my uses of Redline.
This is also the "right way" to use Redline for real investigations, so it is not a bad habit to get into.
In-depth investigations on Windows hosts take time.
There is no way around it.
The modern Windows operating system is an incredibly complex beast with a mind-boggling number of files and registry keys to go through.
However, if you know you are only looking for specific types of artifacts, you may want to go "faster," especially if you are in a testing or training mode, versus conducting real investigations.
Another capability that I recently discovered in the latest version of Redline is "Quick Scans".
This feature is helpful if you either (1) do not use IOCs, or (2) you override Redline's default choices built from IOCs.
The label is misleading, as some of these (in the 1.5) version are not really all that quick.
We are re-assessing what scans go under this grouping and changing the ones that are labeled "quick" in the next update of Redline.
We will also roll out other new features as time goes on, so make sure you give us feedback if you want to see specific functionality within Redline.
We had a LOT of questions from the Fresh Prints of Mal-ware: IOCing Red webinar -- far too many to get to during the allotted time.
To allow us to spend a little bit more time on some of the topics that came up, we took some of the questions we received from the online presentation and hosted a Google+ Hangout with some folks involved in Redline.
We recorded the hangout and posted it on our YouTube channel.
This was our first Hangout, and we had a great time answering questions on Redline.
We plan to do more of these on our other free tools.
The Google+ Hangout platform will allow us to get people together in a fun way, making it easier for us to share information with you in a setting a little more informal than a webinar.
