I am excited today to announce the formation of Mandiant Labs.
M-Labs brings together Mandiant's cadre of reverse engineers, malware analysts and researchers onto a single team that will drive innovation and automation across Mandiant.
At Mandiant we recognize that innovation is the key to staying one step ahead of the adversary.
Over the last few years we have fundamentally changed the way organizations detect, respond to, and contain targeted attacks at massive scale.
Many of those innovations came from the people that now comprise M-Labs.
Mandiant Labs is a natural progression for us.
The advanced persistent threat (APT) and other targeted threats are human adversaries targeting human vulnerabilities.
As organizations evolve their defenses the attackers change their tactics.
Mandiant Labs will help our clients keep pace with the attackers by building operational capabilities that scale Mandiant's expertise to secure our clients' most valuable data.
So what is the M-Labs team going to be up to?
At Mandiant, we have one of the largest intelligence gathering operations specifically focused on tracking advanced attack groups.
This intel comes from more than a million endpoints that we monitor for our clients and hundreds of thousands of hours spent investigating large-scale intrusions around the world.
The M-Labs team will be finding new and faster ways to analyze the malware samples and process other intelligence we receive every day.
In doing so, they provide our consultants and clients the ability to conduct complex investigations in a matter of hours (vs. days or weeks).
Time counts when responding to advanced attackers.
The work of the M-Labs team will help our clients know where the attackers are, how they are behaving and help anticipate their next moves.
The M Labs team is led by Jamie Butler, Chief Researcher and Greg Jones, Director of Mandiant Labs.
Butler is the co-author of the best-selling book, "Rootkits: Subverting the Windows Kernel".
Today, he specializes in memory forensics and enjoys brainstorming on new projects with M-Labs.
Jones has spent the majority of his career working on classified government projects.
The leadership team is rounded out by Michael Sikorski and Peter Silberman.
Sikorski leads the malware team and is the co-author of the recently published book, "Practical Malware Analysis: The Hands-On Guide to Dissecting Malicious Software".
Silberman spends most of his time creating innovative solutions that have a significant impact on the problems we face today.
All of them will be either teaching or attending sessions at Black Hat and DefCon.
We're always looking for recruits who are passionate about finding evil and solving crime.
If you're in Vegas, be sure to stop by and visit us at the Mandiant booth, the M After Dark party at the Shadow Bar, or the Mandiant networking reception.
All the details about where we'll be and what we're up to are here: http://www.mandiant.com/blackhat2012/
