It's hard to believe Black Hat USA is done for this year.
It feels like the week whizzed by with all the activities we were up to while representing the M. From sold-out training courses to a signing with Michael Sikorski and Andy Honig for their recently published book, "Practical Malware Analysis"; we had a great time catching up with old friends and meeting new ones.
I made sure to take as many pictures as I could while I was out at Black Hat, both to capture M out at the conference and to host a photo contest.
The photo contest was a big hit and had some Black Hat attendees running around the Vegas Strip taking some photos to win an Apple iPad®.
I'm happy to announce Bill Lenniger as the M Photo Contest winner!
He will be receiving his Apple iPad® early next week.
Congrats, Bill!
It's hard to summarize the activities and fun we had while at Black Hat this year.
So instead, I will list them out:
M hosted to a packed house at the Shadow Bar on Tuesday, July 24th.
M-Unition's podcast moderator, Kristen Cooper, caught-up with a few of our folks while at Black Hat and hosted some podcasts.
Richard Bejtlich: The Evolution of the Black Hat Conference Michael Sikorski & Andy Honig - Black Hat 2012 Podcast: Practical Malware Analysis Carrie Jung & Mary Singh: Women in the Incident Response Profession
Richard Bejtlich: The Evolution of the Black Hat Conference
Michael Sikorski & Andy Honig - Black Hat 2012 Podcast: Practical Malware Analysis
Carrie Jung & Mary Singh: Women in the Incident Response Profession
Jim Aldridge, Manager, presented his talk, "Targeted Intrusion Remediation: Lessons From The Front Lines" to a full room.
Food & drinks were served in the Mandiant Lair aka Trevi Room for attendees while they were in-between briefings.
We had some Mandiant folks in the Arsenal hall demoing tools to a big crowd.
Chuck Willis, Technical Director, demoed OWASP Broken Web Apps 1.0
Chuck Willis, Technical Director, demoed OWASP Broken Web Apps 1.0
I hope you had a chance to meet-up with us at one of our many events while at Black Hat USA 2012.
We hope to see you at our annual conference, MIRcon, October 17-18, at the Ritz-Carlton in Washington, DC.
