While looking for more information on the recent Mccolo shutdown, the research team here came across something very interesting.
We found a blog with the name of 'micaelale blog' which had an article about the recent take down.
hxxp://micaelale.vox.com/library/post/mccolo.html?_c=feed-atom (careful, it's malicious!)
The main headline of this blog looks like this:
Washington Post Blog Shuts Down 75% of Online Spam .
ESCquire writes "Apparently, the Washington Post Blog 'Security Fix' managed to shut down McColo, a US-based hosting provider facilitating more than 75 percent of global spam. "
..</em>
This article used a very small font size so it was hard to read the text without zooming in, but if you had, you would have noticed an excessive use of term 'McColo' in the whole article, as if to try to up the page rank on search engines.
This succeeded, at least in the short term, when there were very few people referencing McColo.
Mccolo.
mcColo.
mccolo.
Just kidding.
Just above the main article it offers user a chance to watch a video, supposedly related to McColo - perhaps the video from the NBC affiliate who interviewed FireEye about the take down yesterday!
hxxp://topmovie2008.com/index.php?name=mccolo (malicious, don't try to click)
When user clicks on the media player - which looks like a YouTube video - it asks the user to download a fake video codec.
This codec is an Activex Object (setup.exe), which is most certainly a Trojan with callback functionality.
This fake page looked identical to what we saw during the recent Trojan.Exchanger social engineering campaign.
So what is the research team to take from this latest move?
That people behind McColo’s Botnets are using their own recent notoriety to spread more malware?
Perhaps it's some sort of revenge towards those who are inadvertantly seeking information about McColo?
Perhaps that it's a completely unrelated group?
The only positive we can take from this is that even as all their zombies are being (temporarily) abandoned, the Botherders have not abandoned their sense of humor.
Interestingly there was a user's comment on this video as well:
"Wow!
Nice mccolo "
It's hard to understand who could actually enjoy this video, but then again, this comment is right in line with those on the YouTube videos that this is trying to emulate ;)
Atif Mushtaq and Haroon Malik @ FireEye Malware Intelligence Labs
Comments/Questions to [email protected]
