Those of us who deal with the world of cybersecurity on a regular basis are well aware that our computers can become unwitting participants in cyber-criminal activity.
These types of activities can make your network vulnerable to denial of service (DDoS) attacks or to unknowingly be party to cyber espionage against other organizations.
What if you could see this activity happening in real-time and stop it in its tracks?
What if there was a way to quickly gain visibility into the malicious communication that's generated?
What if you could have some context around the frequency, severity and magnitude of the incident?
How would knowing the answers to these questions impact your security posture?
These are the questions that got us thinking about how we could expand our threat detection capabilities and provide our customers with the tools and information they need to pinpoint compromise in their network.
During MIRcon™ 2012, we launched our answer to these questions with our newest product offering: Mandiant Cloud Alert™.
Mandiant Cloud Alert is a powerful tool, enabling organizations to:
identify malicious communication;
audit existing security measures;
monitor how the organization is trending over time; and
track incidents in their network.
Mandiant Cloud Alert is easy to use and can be implemented immediately.
It's a no muss, no fuss approach to monitoring your network.
There's no appliance or agent to install.
All you need to do is provide the address space you want to monitor and voila you'll be tapped into Mandiant's proprietary cloud intelligence network.
At the heart of the product offering, the intelligence network is actively tracking millions of compromised IPs and thousands of command and control servers; this is what gives you the real-time visibility (with no false positives) and early warning when your assets are participating in unwanted behavior
We're excited about our new offering and hope you are too.
Read more about Mandiant Cloud Alert here and contact us today for more information.
