At FireEye we monitor all kinds of attacks: targeted, non-targeted, and everything in between.
We always try to figure out, not just how a piece of malicious code works, but also other possibilities, like whether it is related to some other malware, in what way, etc.
Gh0st has been much talked about and there is a lot of good research out there on this RAT (Remote Access Trojan).
This RAT has been used in many serious attacks and a quick Google search on the Gh0st RAT will give you a lot of good articles which will go into great detail about the versions and the inner workings of the malware.
However this post is not about Gh0st.
Very recently while investigating some of these Gh0st infections, we identified another interesting piece of malware.
The malware binary is UPX compressed.
When this binary is executed it drops an exe (svchost.exe) in the "Documents And Settings\\<User>\\Local Settings\\Application Data\\Microsoft" folder.
The dropped binary is also UPX compressed.
The Backdoor uses a custom protocol over TCP to communicate to its CnC.
The picture below shows the CnC communication of the Backdoor.
Since the domain to which the malware was communicating was down, we used Mandiant’s FakeNet and recorded all the communication.
In the picture below you see the very first communication that is sent to the CnC by the infected machine.
The "NEW" keyword that is sent back to the CnC lets the CnC know that it is a newly infected machine.
The following CnC communications are replaced with the "OLD" keyword as you can see in the picture below.
The malware also communicates to its CnC about the port it’s listening on.
In the picture above "3174" is the port number that the malware is informing its C2.
We also noticed another type of communication where the malware clearly informs its CnC that it is awaiting further commands for it to take actions on the compromised machine.
These are some of the callback channels we observed.
I have highlighted some of the interesting commands that were sent from the infected machine to the CnC.
The keywords highlighted in blue are the ports that the malware is using.
The Backdoor has certain key functions.
It is able to steal Mozilla FireFox passwords.
It does this by getting the path to the signons.sqlite database.
This sqlite DB is used by Mozilla to store username and passwords.
Apart from stealing Mozilla passwords the malware doubles as a DDOSer.
The malware has the following DDOS modules.
We also observed that the malware had the following commands embedded in it.
As you can see, some commands are pending research and we need to figure out how they work.
More importantly though, there are strings in the binary referencing "DarkDDOSER."
One can only speculate if in some way "DarkDdoser" and the Gh0st RAT complement each other.
