As our regular readers know, we are celebrating National Women's History Month on the M-Unition blog featuring women that are passionate about their careers in security.
Featured this month, we've sat down with Kristen Vanderame, CEO of Pondera, Halvar Flake and Carrie Jung, to discuss a women-only reverse engineering competition and now Stephanie Scheuermann of Ford Motor Company.
These are women that are embracing technology to make a difference in the world of cybersecurity.
The exclusive Q&A; with Stephanie follows:
HB: Please introduce yourself and explain your role at your organization.
SS: I'm Stephanie Scheuermann, Senior Security & Control Engineer at Ford Motor Company.
I manage the Ford Computer Incident Response Team (CIRT).
Ford CIRT is a global team of highly technical analysts located in multiple regions around the world.
We provide proactive and reactive security services to protect Ford's technology, infrastructure, applications, and data from compromise.
Our scope of responsibility covers any Ford Motor Company asset or asset of any subsidiary or joint venture worldwide.
I have been in this role since October 2004, witnessing the evolution of the field and driving the development of our service capability over time.
HB: How did you get started in the field?
SS: In early 2000, I held an infrastructure support role leading a team responsible for maintaining production Windows and Unix servers.
One could say that I was in the right place, at the wrong time.
A rash of virus outbreaks (SQL Slammer, Nimda, CodeRed, etc.)
resulted in Information Security eventually being recognized as an IT specialty.
Ford invested in technology and people to create a dedicated CIRT organization within Ford IT.
At the time, I was in a role at Ford Credit, a subsidiary of Ford, where I responded to the impact of those outbreaks.
Between 2002 and 2004, I moved to an infrastructure development role.
The assignment brought me closer to the Information Security organization at Ford Motor Company.
The Security Director at the time noticed my keen interest in Information Security and pointed me to an opportunity to move into the role of CIRT Supervisor.
Since then, I have earned my Master's degree in Information Security, CISSP and GCFA credentials.
I have been able to shape the CIRT and services that are provided today.
I have also participated in the development of an information security strategy and built relationships with my external peers.
I am most proud of the opportunity to help design a technical career path for others in the Information Security specialty at Ford.
HB: What interests you most about your career?
SS: The lack of monotony in my job upholds my interest and motivates me daily.
No single inquiry or escalation is ever truly the same.
Even so, the challenge of detecting and responding to cyber-attacks remains the same.
Methods used by the adversary can change from day to day.
The need for constant vigilance and flexibility based on real threat intelligence is energizing for me.
I often get asked to share "ghost stories" with various internal teams to spread awareness.
Each time my response is, "I only tell true stories."
The demand for continuous learning and heightened awareness can be exhausting and quite often disheartening as most times we are reacting to a breach.
Certainly, most of my own time is spent dispelling the rumors and translating the complex information into messages the business can understand.
What I find most rewarding is the knowledge that what I do every day adds value to the business.
HB: How would you recommend someone enter the field of cybersecurity?
SS: I am approached by students just starting out and experienced IT professionals alike.
My recommendations are always the same: seek out opportunities to take on assignments that will provide more direct and hands-on experience in Information Security.
For instance, accept the assignment to perform the annual control review for your department or application.
Recognize the skills you already know and tasks you do daily can map to a career in information security.
For instance, reading through 10 domains in the CISSP certification opens a lot of minds in regard to what the field of cybersecurity can include.
Quite often, technicians, analysts, lawyers and even application developers don't realize that they are already performing information security work.
This work can create a bridge for a seamless transition into cybersecurity as a specialty.
Other recommendations include joining special interest groups, even in your neighborhood.
These days, most cities and towns have a volunteer corps for emergencies (CERT).
If you are a technical hands-on person, practice on your own at home.
Don't be afraid to experiment and learn.
There are several free, self-learning tools available to experiment with on your home network.
Most importantly, recognize that it takes time to develop an expertise; it's not as glamorous or as easy as it seems on TV.
HB: What are your thoughts on key ways to develop top talent?
SS: It is important to take a seat at the table.
Security practitioners and leaders should be involved in curriculum development at the university level and within their companies.
It is about developing and sustaining talent.
Business and corporations should engage with local university and college programs to offer focused internships and capstone projects.
Recruit specifically for Information Security professionals.
If you have a hand in defining the curriculum and testing the talent, you will ultimately have a hand in providing an avenue to a talent pool you helped create.
This applies whether recruiting new talent or developing the competency and capability of existing staff.
