Those of you who are Black Hat veterans may know that we at Mandiant offer a variety of training classes at the event each year.
This year is no different.
At Black Hat USA 2013, we'll be conducting training on Malware Analysis, Incident Response and Advanced Malware Analysis, led by some of the best cybersecurity professionals in the business.
In each class, students will learn from either members of M-Labs or our consulting team.
These instructors are experts in the field - and practice what they preach.
They'll leverage their own front-line experience to pass along cutting-edge insights on what students need to know and how to put that knowledge to the best possible use.
For Malware Analysis: Black Hat Edition (a two-day class offered July 27-28 and July 29-30), Instructor Steve Davis will use a practical, hands-on approach to provide a rapid introduction to the tools and methodologies used to perform malware analysis on executables found on Windows systems.
Students will learn how to find the functionality of a program by analyzing disassembly and by watching how it modifies a system and its resources as it runs in a debugger.
Students will also learn how to extract host and network-based indicators from a malicious program - and about dynamic analysis and the Windows APIs most often used by malware authors.
Each section is filled with in-class demonstrations and hands-on labs with real malware where the students practice what they have learned.
At Incident Response: Black Hat Edition (a two day course offered July 27-28 and again July 29-30), Instructors Ryan Kazanciyan and Chris Nutt will teach fundamental and cutting-edge data collection and analysis techniques information that security professionals need to investigate increasingly complex intrusion scenarios.
The course - which has been redesigned and updated for 2013 - contains case studies and hands-on lab exercises tailored to the latest attack scenarios identified by Mandiant's investigations into the compromise of public and private sector organizations.
The course will equip students with the forensic skills and investigative techniques needed to respond to targeted attacks - and to understand each phase of the targeted attack lifecycle and the resulting indicators of compromise.
Hands-on labs and exercises drawn from real-world incidents will provide students with the opportunity to apply their knowledge, examine evidence, and learn new forensics tools.
For Advanced Malware Analysis (a four day course beginning Saturday, July 27), Instructors Michael Sikorski and Jay Smith will teach students how to combat sophisticated malware head-on, by studying common obfuscation techniques.
They will learn how to specifically combat against packing, anti-disassembly, anti-debugging and anti-virtual machine techniques - and have an opportunity to test their skills.
Since not all malware samples are written in plain C, students will also learn how to identify and analyze samples written in alternate programming languages.
These courses - which routinely draw rave reviews from Black Hat attendees - provide a unique opportunity to learn cutting-edge detection and mitigation techniques from the best in the field.
We hope you're able to make time for these training courses.
Here are registration links:
Malware Analysis: Black Hat Edition
Incident Response: Black Hat Edition
Advanced Malware Analysis
