The information and views set out in these responses are those of the respondents and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of Mandiant Corporation.
Each month, we reach out to our braintrust on LinkedIn and around the web to check in on the state of cybersecurity in different industries, to see what insights they have to offer to M-Unition readers who might be grappling with the same types of problems.
This time, we consulted everyday experts in financial services, the payment industry and compliance/governance to see what financial services companies should do to best protect their networks.
Following are some of the best answers we received:
"There is no single answer here as there are many facets to network security.
The most fundamental one that I would recommend: Apply a stringent security standard, meet it, hire a third party security assessor to certify that the standard is met, remediate shortfalls as needed, and have the internal and external network scanned regularly to uncover vulnerabilities.
Renew certification annually."
- Chuck Scharder
"Financial Services Companies should do a network performance assessment to understand where their problems are so they can prioritize and address them.
Since voice networks are separate, so they need to test their Voice Over IP networks in real time to detect and prevent security issues such as fraud and theft of services.
Huge losses have been recorded and are not readily detected with outdated technology."
- Vaune M. Carr
The question sparked a conversation excerpted below.
As the responses illustrate, addressing these issues is a complex proposition.
Alan Proctor, CISSP, FAIRiq, 6Sigma, Security and Risk Management Professional:
A quantitative analysis to determine the frequency (likelihood) of threats against defined assets to determine the probability of financial loss.
Thomas Butler, CISSP, CEH, CHFI, CISA, CPA, CIA, IT Security Architect:
@Alan, you're joking?
They should use "defense in depth" and of course one of the best defenses is encryption both in storage and over the wire.
Justin Raphael Donnaruma Director of Cyber Intelligence Operations:
@Thomas, I completely agree.
Multi-layer, Defense-in-depth strategies are the best way to go.
Although, personally, if I have to pick a SINGLE item, it would be "Social Engineering Awareness"
Alan Proctor, CISSP, FAIRiq, 6Sigma, Security and Risk Management Professional:
Why use "defense in depth" when the estimated financial loss associated with the perceived (or actual) threat is one percent of the cost of the controls?
Come on, please think like the CFO...
Thomas Butler, CISSP, CEH, CHFI, CISA, CPA, CIA, IT Security Architect:
@Alan, what happens if the company is hacked because they did not have a defense in depth posture and the actual loss is 100 times the cost of the defense in depth controls?
Justin Raphael Donnaruma, Director of Cyber Intelligence Operations
That is very dependent on what you plan on using for controls.
For most SMBs, I can have a complete Defense-In-Depth strategy put in place for between $150-300 per user.
I could usually do the same for a large enterprise as well.
Contrast that to the $240 per record that you'll probably spend when your company is breached, and I think you're spending a heck of a lot less.
Tyler Rorabaugh, VP of Engineering
Application Security Testing
Thomas Butler, CISSP, CEH, CHFI, CISA, CPA, CIA, IT Security Architect
@Tyler.
Yes that is where a lot of the holes are.
Having fooled a round just a very little bit with programming, I can see where mistakes can be made that go unnoticed even if the app is pen tested.
Stephen "Steve" King, CISSP, CISA, Senior Information Security Officer
There are a myriad of things that could be listed explicitly to better anyone's network.
However, the general rule of thumb is: Assess, Plan, and Act- (continuously).
