It's the middle of summer, and as the thermometers soar above 100°F the eyes of the security industry turn to Las Vegas for Black Hat 2014.
The conference, August 2-7, brings the security industry's best and brightest together for six days of training and networking.
Starting Aug. 5, join Mandiant's experts as they explore the latest security trends, incident response tactics and more!
TUESDAY, AUG. 5:
Join us for an unforgettable evening at the Eye Candy Sound Lounge in Mandalay Bay.
The event will showcase music, food, and libations served by the venue's world-class bartenders.
Don't miss the premier after-hours party at Black Hat from 7:00 PM - 9:00 PM PDT.
Register for the party at http://marketing.mandiant.com/black_hat_m_after_dark_2014
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 6:
Visit the Mandiant booth (South Convention Center, Level 2, Shorelines A) throughout the day on Wednesday to learn more about Mandiant services and watch presentations from our experts:
@ 11:15AM Chief Cyber Solutions Strategist for EMEA, Paul Dwyer, presents strategies on how to convince leadership to address targeted threats.
@12:45PM Senior Consultant, Nick Pelletier, discusses his experiences from the front lines as a consultant at Mandiant by providing insights into ever-evolving attacker tactics as well as the attacker's ability to quickly adapt to changes in an organization's security posture.
@1:30PM Manager of Threat Intelligence for FireEye Labs, Jen Weedon, will speak on the latest threat trends and offers visibility into motives, approaches, and different skill levels of attackers around the globe.
@4:30PM Senior Consultant, Mary Singh, explains the structure and significance of the Application Compatibility Cache (AppCompatCache) key and describes why some forensic tools fail to read the key's data structures in the Windows registry.
Richard Bejtlich, FireEye's Chief Security Strategist and author of The Practice of Network Security Monitoring will be signing copies of his book at the Mandiant booth from 5:30PM-6:00PM.
In The Practice of Network Security Monitoring, Bejtlich shows you how to use NSM to add a robust layer of protection around your networks - no prior experience required.
Matt Pepe, Senior Technical Director at Mandiant and co-author of Incident Response & Computer Forensics will be signing copies of his book at the Mandiant booth from6:15PM - 6:45PM.
In the recently released third edition of Incident Response & Computer Forensics, Pepe arms incident responders with effective response tools and techniques.
THURSDAY AUG. 7:
If you are unable to make it on Wednesday, make sure to pass by Mandiant's booth on Thursday to meet and speak with our experts.
Also, catch encore sessions of our Wednesday booth presentations:
@ 11:15AM Chief Cyber Solutions Strategist for EMEA, Paul Dwyer, presents strategies on how to convince leadership to address targeted threats.
@12:45PM Senior Consultant, Nick Pelletier, discusses his experiences from the front lines as a consultant at Mandiant by providing insights into ever-evolving attacker tactics as well as the attacker's ability to quickly adapt to changes in an organization's security posture.
@1:30PM Manager of Threat Intelligence for FireEye Labs, Jen Weedon, will speak on the latest threat trends and offers visibility into motives, approaches, and different skill levels of attackers around the globe.
@3:15PM Senior Consultant, Mary Singh, explains the structure and significance of the Application Compatibility Cache (AppCompatCache) key and describes why some forensic tools fail to read the key's data structures in the Windows registry.
Which Mandiant sessions are you looking most forward to?
Let us know in the comments.
Also, make sure to follow @Mandiant on Twitter for the latest news and updates during the show.
