A recent report documents a group of attackers known as “PittyTiger” that appears to have been active since at least 2011; however, they may have been operating as far back as 2008.
We have been monitoring the activities of this group and believe they are operating from China.
This group leverages social engineering to deliver spearphishing emails, in a variety of languages including English, French and Chinese, and email phishing pages to their targets.
The attackers use a variety of different malware and tools to maintain command and control (C2) and move laterally through their targets’ networks.
In a recent attack against a French company, the attackers sent simple, straightforward messages in English and French from free email addresses using names of actual employees of the targeted company.
We have also observed this group using a Yahoo!
email phishing kit, with phishing pages for multiple regions and in multiple languages.
The malicious documents exploit vulnerable versions of Microsoft Office.
The attackers used two different exploits CVE-2012-0158 and CVE-2014-1761.
The documents that exploit CVE-2012-0158 were built using a tool that leaves behind the metadata which indicates that the author is “Tran Duy Linh”.
(This builder has been shared across multiple threat groups that are otherwise unconnected).
The documents that exploit CVE-2014-1761 contain metadata that matches malicious documents created by both the Jdoc builder and the Metasploit Framework, however, the exact builder tool used by the attackers remains unclear.
This threat group uses a first-stage malware known as Backdoor.APT.Pgift (aka Troj/ReRol.A), which is dropped via malicious documents and connects back to a C2 server.
This malware communicates some information about the compromised computer; however, its primary function is to deliver the second-stage malware to the compromised computer.
During our investigation, we discovered a builder used in conjunction with the Backdoor.APT.Pgift malware.
This builder is used to create and test files placed on the C2 server.
The builder creates three files:
The dr.asp file is placed on a web server, and malware on compromised systems will beacon to it.
The file can retrieve the compromised host’s IP address and returns either a 32-bit or 64-bit second-stage executable depending on the compromised host’s environment.
The Install-Dll.bat file simply installs JHttpSrv.dll by running the command:
The JHttpSrv.dll handles the incoming, encoded data from compromised hosts.
This data is written to a text file in a directory named “log” with the following format:
IP Address-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS.
[3 digits].txt
This data contains information about the compromised system including:
System Type (32-bin or 64-bit)
Ports and Processes
Although this tool has some information-gathering capabilities, it is primarily a “downloader” designed to push second-stage malware to a compromised system.
It appears the Backdoor.APT.Pgift malware was used in an earlier attack against a target in Taiwan.
Although the email date shows September 2010, the actual email appears to have been sent in January 2014.
The malicious attachment 中秋節酒品禮薈萃.doc (4c350726bb7773f0ac98bdd665ef93dc) exploits CVE-2012-0158 to drop f3b1a1c18c783c2e949e68f0dd047eae.
The network communication is:
POST /pgift.asp HTTP/1.1
User-Agent: Mozilla/4.0 (compatible;)
