Malware authors are always looking for new ways to masquerade their actions.
Attackers are looking for their malware to be not only fully undetectable, but also appear valid on a system, so as not to draw attention.
Digital signatures are one way malware authors keep under the radar.
Digital signatures are an easy, quick way to verify the authenticity of an application utilizing the signature.
Threat actors routinely steal digital signing certificates to hide in plain sight.
There are recent reports of banking Trojans such as Zeus, using valid signatures to get past both automated and human defenses.
Part of performing accurate threat intelligence is continually looking to the past to help better predict the future.
This is proven in the samples we will be discussing in this blog.
Many of the samples throughout this blog are from the summer of 2013.
These particular samples however, piqued our interest because of the mass distribution of RATs in a particular targeted region.
It also reminded us of a recent XtremeRAT blog we published earlier in 2014.
The Little Signature That Could
While investigating an uptick in Spy-Net spam campaigns, we came across a malware binary that was digitally signed that struck our interest.
Spy-Net allows an attacker to interact with the victim via a remote shell to upload/download files, interact with the registry, running processes and services as well as capture images of the desktop and record form the webcam and audio.
It also contains functionality to extract saved passwords and turn the victim into a proxy server.
During the build process, an attacker can choose to enable a keylogger and evasion functionality designed to stop the information process if a debugger or virtual machine is found.
We noticed that one of the Spy-Net binary files, sc2.exe (MD5: 6a56f6735f4b16a60f39b18842fd97d0), upon closer inspection, was utilizing a valid digital signature, from a company called CZ Solution Co. Ltd.
Figure 1: Signature Details of sc2.exe
Looking closer at the signature, we noticed that all of the details were intact, and appeared to be valid.
There are two additional code-signing certificates issued to CZ Solution Co. Ltd.
Figure 2: Additional Signature Details
Investigation of sc2.exe showed typical Spy-Net behaviors.
The sample beaconed out to ekinox.no-ip.info.
From here, we decided to pivot off the CZ Solution signature and see what we could find.
As we started to pivot off the CZ Solution signature, we started to see some interesting commonalities.
Pivoting proved that the CZ Solution signature was not just used in Spy-Net binaries.
We quickly found that this signature was being used with XtremeRAT, a popular RAT that cybercriminals and targeted attackers use regularly.
The code of XtremeRAT is shared amongst several other Delphi RAT projects including Spy-Net, CyberGate, and Cerberus.
XtremeRAT allows an attacker to:
Interact with the victim via a remote shell
Interact with the registry
Manipulate running processes and services
Capture images of the desktop
Record from connected devices, such as a webcam or microphone
One binary for instance, m.exe (MD5: c27232691dacf4cff24a4d04b3b2896b) which was XtremeRAT, was seen beaconing out to http://omegaphotography.
[co].uk, batardchris.servehttp.com /1234567890.functions, and www.batteurmag.com/[plugin].xtr.
Likewise, we saw multiple samples of the Zeus Trojan utilizing the CZ Solution signature.
Zeus modifiers can tune Zeus to steal information they are interested in; typically login credentials for online social networks, e-mail accounts, online banking or other online financial services.
Zeus is commonly seen targeting customers of financial institutions.
One of the Zeus samples, uk.exe (MD5: dcd3e45d40c8817061f716557e7a05b6) that was utilizing the CZ Solution signature, was beaconing out to claire-morin.com/file.php.
Looking at the three samples show that CZ Solution was used to create and sign Spy-Net, XtremeRAT, and Zeus samples.
Graphing out the connections between the samples we profiled, you can quickly see how fast this web of similarities continue.
Figure 3: Connection Profile of Binaries Using CZ Solution
The French Connection and C2 overlap
Attribution of actors and/or campaigns can often be a difficult and tedious task.
However, since we were dealing with so many inter-twining binaries, we could start to draw some parallels between samples.
When looking at the overall connections between the CZ solution signature, you can start to see a trend emerge.
First, there is some C2 overlap.
For instance Dllsv.exe (MD5: 3f042fd6b9ce7e23b3c84c6f7323dd75) communicates out to ekinox.no-ip.info, using the same CZ Solution cert.
This malware is flagged as BozokRAT; a user-friendly RAT that can upload and download files to and from a computer, modify registry entries, and perform other typical RAT functions.
That same C2, ekinox.no-ip.info, is also seen used by the aforementioned Spy-Net binary, sc2.exe (MD5: 6a56f6735f4b16a60f39b18842fd97d0).
In another example of C2 overlap, a file named uk.exe, (MD5: 9c11ef09131a3373eef5c9d83802d56b) uses its C2 as omega-photography.co.uk.
This sample is an active Zeus binary.
That same C2 is used with a file named x.exe, (MD5: c27232691dacf4cff24a4d04b3b2896b), an active XtremeRAT binary.
Next, we needed to identify at least one infection vector to ensure we could track how one of the binaries using the CZ Solution signature was getting into environments.
In one case, we found the infection vector for an XtremeRAT binary that was using the CZ Solution certificate.
The binary came in the form of phished email (MD5: 7c00ba0fcbfee6186994a8988a864385) purportedly from Armani regarding an order.
The email was in French and the headers were interesting, as the same sender has been seen in multiple French spam runs.
The attachment in the email is using the RTLO trick to disguise a 7zip file as a PDF.
While looking at the all the samples we correlated and pivoted off of, we found that a majority of both the language and C2’s being used all revolved around the French language.
The domains that were part of the C2 infrastructure were almost all exclusively French, as was the registrant information for the domains in question.
Spy-Net C2 Protocol Analysis
