We recently had the opportunity to collaborate with ThreatConnect’s Intelligence Research Team (TCIRT) to conduct follow-up reporting on threat group activity that appears to originate from Pakistan.
The TCIRT originally reported on this activity in August 2013 in their “Where There is Smoke, There is Fire” blog post.
This post covered a threat group using malware and apparent lures that would be effective against Indian targets: an Indian Government Ministry of Defense pension memorandum and an apparent lure related to Sarabjit Singh, an Indian national who died in a Pakistani prison last year.
Our collaboration with ThreatConnect centered on technical analysis of the BITTERBUG malware family and other technical characteristics of the activity.
ThreatConnect provided deep analysis of open source data to highlight interesting persona and organizational details.
FireEye Labs analysts have also been tracking this group’s activities – identifying and tracking their custom malware family that we call BITTERBUG and their command and control (C2) servers.
The report was released today assessing new information on this group and identifying new factors that draw further suspicion to Pakistan as the probable origination point.
From the earliest samples of BITTERBUG to its latest variants, we have observed changes that show movement away from specific debug paths to new, generic paths; a process that occurred following TCIRT’s original blog post.
The group appears to have remained active after the TCIRT blog post, using new BITTERBUG malware variants with the more-generic embedded file paths.
During this same timeframe, we observed these variants packaged with various support components and using lures related to the December 2013 arrest of Indian diplomat Devyani Khobragade in the United States and the March 2014 disappearance of Malaysia Airlines flight 370 (cast in these ‘lure’ emails as a Pakistan-related hijacking).
Though BITTERBUG deployment methods remained similar throughout, we also observed new deployment behaviors following the August blog post.
We encourage you to read the new paper here http://www.threatconnect.com/arachnophobia.
