The Android ecosystem is all about communicating, and right now it’s screaming for help.
That’s because SSL vulnerabilities and the Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attacks they enable are wreaking havoc on data security.
The scariest part?
SSL vulnerabilities are evident in many of today’s most popular applications as we recently uncovered.
The FireEye Mobile Security Team analyzed Google Play’s most downloaded Android applications and found that a significant portion of them are susceptible to MITM attacks.
These popular apps allow an attacker to intercept data exchanged between the Android device and a remote server.
We notified the developers, who acknowledged the reported vulnerabilities and addressed them in subsequent versions of their applications.
Our researchers also constructed a MITM attack demonstration for each of the case studies in this blog.
We did not use the infrastructure to glean any private or personal information of any user, other than that of the synthetic user we created to demonstrate the applications mentioned.
Mobile applications often talk to remote servers for their functionality.
Applications can communicate using the HTTP protocol, which makes it easy for others to intercept data, or the HTTPS protocol – which makes it harder, if not impossible, to intercept data.
The security properties of HTTPS stem from Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and its successor, Transport Layer Security (TLS).
The Android platform provides libraries and methods to communicate with a server using these secure network protocols, forming the underpinnings of Public-Key Infrastructure (PKI).
But, while the SSL/TLS protocol is designed for enhanced security, incorrect use of the Android platform’s SSL libraries can expose applications to MITM attacks.
In these attacks, an MITM attacker intercepts traffic from the application to a server or vice versa and may:
be a quiet listener that exfiltrates data sent either by the application or by the server,
intercept data from the server and either modify or replace it with malicious data that gets injected into the application, and
redirect traffic to an entirely new destination controlled by the attacker.
For a clearer explanation of MITM attacks, at the end of this blog we included a detailed walkthrough of the attack mechanics .
Detecting SSL Vulnerabilities in Android
The following is a subset of the SSL/TLS vulnerabilities that we analyzed using our Mobile Threat Prevention platform:
The use of trust managers that do not check certificate chains from remote servers, making it possible for an MITM attack to succeed.
