It seemed fitting that the last day of MIRcon started with a total lunar eclipse and ended with an inspirational keynote address by renowned astrophysicist Dr. Neil deGrasse Tyson.
After an amazing two days of content, MIRcon 2014 is officially in the books!
Following are some of the highlights.
Chris Sanders and Jason Smith's presentation, Applied Detection and Analysis Using Flow Data, discussed how flow data can be used for detecting both structured and unstructured threats The presenters also spoke on how flow data can be used to augment the analysis of network security events detected by other mechanisms.
Amanda Stewart brought attendees up to speed about the true nature of Mac OSX malware, dissected OSX malware authors, and common threat indicators and evasion techniques of current OSX malware in the wild during her session, "Plists, Shell Scripts and Object-C, Oh-My!"
Russian nesting dolls, or Matyroshka, served as a clever metaphor for Jacob Kitchel's session entitled, "The Security Matryoshka - The Ins, Outs and Challenges of Security in a Large Utility," where Jacob discussed the complexities of managing security in large organizations.
After lunch, famed astrophysicist Dr. Neil deGrasse Tyson mesmerized the crowd and gave an inspiring keynote address as he commented on the state of science in America during his session, "Science as a way of Knowing".
Every good conference needs awards which is why we brought the "Malies" back for 2014.
In "The 2014 'Malies' Awards: Best & Worst Targeted Malware of 2014," Richard Wartell gave attendees a first-hand look into how to reverse engineer real-world malware and focused on samples with interesting and comical mistakes that malware authors made in 2014.
Closing out the day, Thoufique Haq and Ned Moran discussed evidence of collaboration among advanced attackers, their shared tailored tools and evasion techniques, and what their research has uncovered about varied collaborating groups in their session, "An Insight into Symbiotic APT Groups".
Couldn't make the conference?
Register for the upcoming recap webinar where we'll present, at a high level, everything that went on during this year's MIRcon.
To all of our attendees, thank you for making this year a smashing success!
