In July 2014, FireEye mobile security researchers have discovered that an iOS app installed using enterprise/ad-hoc provisioning could replace another genuine app installed through the App Store, as long as both apps used the same bundle identifier.
This in-house app may display an arbitrary title (like “New Flappy Bird”) that lures the user to install it, but the app can replace another genuine app after installation.
All apps can be replaced except iOS preinstalled apps, such as Mobile Safari.
This vulnerability exists because iOS doesn't enforce matching certificates for apps with the same bundle identifier.
We verified this vulnerability on iOS 7.1.1, 7.1.2, 8.0, 8.1 and 8.1.1 beta, for both jailbroken and non-jailbroken devices.
An attacker can leverage this vulnerability both through wireless networks and USB.
We named this attack “Masque Attack," and have created a demo video here:
We have notified Apple about this vulnerability on July 26.
Recently Claud Xiao discovered the “WireLurker” malware.
After looking into WireLurker, we found that it started to utilize a limited form of Masque Attacks to attack iOS devices through USB.
Masque Attacks can pose much bigger threats than WireLurker.
Masque Attacks can replace authentic apps,such as banking and email apps, using attacker's malware through the Internet.
That means the attacker can steal user's banking credentials by replacing an authentic banking app with an malware that has identical UI.
Surprisingly, the malware can even access the original app's local data, which wasn't removed when the original app was replaced.
These data may contain cached emails, or even login-tokens which the malware can use to log into the user's account directly.
We have seen proofs that this issue started to circulate.
In this situation, we consider it urgent to let the public know, since there could be existing attacks that haven’t been found by security vendors.
We are also sharing mitigation measures to help iOS users better protect themselves.
By leveraging Masque Attack, an attacker can lure a victim to install an app with a deceiving name crafted by the attacker (like “New Angry Bird”), and the iOS system will use it to replace a legitimate app with the same bundle identifier.
Masque Attack couldn't replace Apple's own platform apps such as Mobile Safari, but it can replace apps installed from app store.
Masque Attack has severe security consequences:
Attackers could mimic the original app’s login interface to steal the victim’s login credentials.
We have confirmed this through multiple email and banking apps, where the malware uses a UI identical to the original app to trick the user into entering real login credentials and upload them to a remote server.
We also found that data under the original app’s directory, such as local data caches, remained in the malware local directory after the original app was replaced.
The malware can steal these sensitive data.
We have confirmed this attack with email apps where the malware can steal local caches of important emails and upload them to remote server.
The MDM interface couldn’t distinguish the malware from the original app, because they used the same bundle identifier.
Currently there is no MDM API to get the certificate information for each app.
Thus, it is difficult for MDM to detect such attacks.
As mentioned in our Virus Bulletin 2014 paper “Apple without a shell - iOS under targeted attack”, apps distributed using enterprise provisioning profiles (which we call “EnPublic apps”) aren’t subjected to Apple’s review process.
Therefore, the attacker can leverage iOS private APIs for powerful attacks such as background monitoring (CVE-2014-1276) and mimic iCloud’s UI to steal the user’s Apple ID and password.
The attacker can also use Masque Attacks to bypass the normal app sandbox and then get root privileges by attacking known iOS vulnerabilities, such as the ones used by the Pangu team.
