There is no substitute for data gained from first-hand experience when it comes to analyzing and understanding today’s advanced cyber attacks and the threat actors behind them.
At Mandiant, we have investigated hundreds of security breaches over the years and have responded to many of 2014’s biggest security incidents.
This provides us with a unique vantage point when it comes to understanding the ever-evolving threat landscape.
Today we are releasing “M-Trends 2015: A View from the Front Lines.” In this sixth edition of Mandiant’s annual threat report, we distill the insights gleaned from hundreds of incident-response investigations across more than 30 industry sectors.
The report provides key trends, statistics, and case studies to illustrate how advanced threat actors have evolved over the last year.
The report also explains how organizations can improve the way they prevent, detect, analyze, and respond to advanced attacks.
These recommendations are once again based on our experience gained from direct work with victim organizations as they plan and adapt their responses to these changing threats.
Here are just a few highlights from this year’s report:
* Attackers had access to victims’ environments for 205 days on average before they were discovered.
Despite heightened awareness of high-profile breaches, this number has not changed much from our 2014 report.
* Sixty-nine percent of victims learn from a third party that they are compromised.
This statistic highlights the continued need for improved detection capabilities for most organizations.
* Attackers are increasingly skilled at minimizing their forensic footprint.
They continue to adapt how they maintain their presence and use existing tools to move throughout the compromised environment.
The report discusses these techniques in detail.
* Attributing attacks to a specific threat actor is growing more challenging as the lines blur between tools and tactics used by cyber criminals and nation-state actors.
This trend makes discerning the goals of the attackers more important so that victims can formulate an appropriate response.
You can download the report here.
To hear more about the report and participate in a Q&A with several of the report’s co-authors, register here for our M-Trends webinar, scheduled for Thursday, Feb. 26.
