MANDIANT is proud to announce a new version of Highlighter (version 1.1.1).
There are big changes between our previous release and this one, so grab it while it's hot!
The biggest enhancements are bolded in the change log below.
Download the new version at http://www.mandiant.com/software/highlighter.htm.
Don't forget that we're relying on the user community to suggest improvements.
Check out https://community.fireeye.com/welcome and head to the Highlighter section to give us your input.
Feedback, feature requests, bugs, and use-cases are all very welcome.
Change Log (since v1.0.1):
Fix: Tabs were mistakenly removed by input sanitization.
This has been corrected.
Fix: The highlight hit count was incorrect - an additional hit per line was mistakenly being added.
This has been corrected.
Fix: The events over time histogram was not properly displaying highlights.
This has been corrected.
Fix: If text was selected in the textbox, and the user clicked on the highlight button, the selection would not be highlighted.
This has been corrected.
Enhancement: The graphic overview now draws much faster.
New Feature: The textbox is now a 100% custom control.
It is virtualized, and supports a wider range of visual display effects.
When words are highlighted, the actual word on each line will be surrounded by a colored translucent bubble with a slightly darkened border.
The textbox selection and scrolling behavior is now more like a traditional Windows textbox.
New Feature: Highlighter will now open MUCH larger files.
NOTE: Highlighter now keeps a file open while you are working with it.
New Feature: Highlighter will now accept a list of terms, one on a line, as input to automatically highlight or remove lines.
Look under the right click menu, Highlight -> Import Simple List and under Line Operations -> Remove Using Simple List.
Enhancement: Files will now open somewhat more quickly due to optimization of calculating the MD5 sum of the file.
Enhancement: The events over time histogram has sharper numbers on the X and Y axis.
Fix: The events over time histogram scale now properly adjusts when when switching from linear to log mode.
Fix: A number of State issues were resolved.
Fix: Various other minor bugs.
New Feature: Highlighter support opening a document from a Mandiant Intelligent Response (MIR) controller.
Look for the new option from the File -> Open menu.
New Feature: Highlighter will add a Windows Explorer shell extension by default.
Fix: A number of State issues were resolved, including improper handling of when a selection included a comma.
Fix: A race condition existed in the implementation of retrieving lines from the current file.
Fix: Not all hotkeys were actually implemented in code.
Fix: Highlight counts in the status bar were incorrect sometimes.
Fix: Sometimes you could not scroll to the bottom of a file using the scrollbar.
Fix: Events over time histogram had a very sparse appearance.
Fix: After opening a file, you could not use hotkeys like CTRL-O to open files, nor could you do things like ALT-F4 or any other key sequence with modifiers.
Fix: The remove feature would not remove lines with selections that contained a TAB.
Fix: Various other minor bugs.
