In the third part of this series, I'm going to discuss the command and control structure of another famous botnet, Clampi a.k.a ilomo.
Clampi is all about data stealing and is famous for its anti-reversing and evasion techniques.
The financial damage this information stealer can cause is evident from the fact that it has recently been publicly disclosed of a cyber theft of more than $150,000.
Notorious isn't it..?
Like the first two parts where I discussed the command and control structure of the Pushdo and Koobface botnets, I'll start by showing the current geographical distribution of Clampi CnCs, followed by a brief analysis on the chances of shutting down these control servers and hence the complete botnet.
This article is not an in depth analysis of the malware itself but concentrates more on current geo locations of Clampi command and control servers.
For detailed in-depth analysis of this malware, one may refer to this.
Let's start with a brief introduction to the Clampi command and control architecture which is not a classical client/server model.
As a matter of fact, there are two types of CnC servers involved here.
1.
Gate Servers
Gate Servers are the first level or "master command and control servers" which are responsible for locating secondary CnC servers, or "Gates".
Instead of using one big CnC host list, this model gives the Clampi masters more flexibility in running and maintaining the botnet.
They have the freedom to change the secondary servers at any time for load balancing or for evading black list based security gateways.
It also gives the bot herders an option not to buy dedicated hosting for each CnC.
While Gate Servers may be dedicated or paid-for servers, the secondary servers might be compromised legitimate servers.
Why am I calling these servers Gates?
Well, the Clampi authors themselves refer to them in this way.
Information about the initial Gate Servers on the compromised machines is stored inside a registry key like this:
I have observed the following behavior for all the Clampi samples tested and run in my lab.
1.
Each instance comes with at least two Gate Servers.
2.
The Gate Servers will be domain names instead of IPs.
3.
The secondary servers or Gates have been found to be hard coded IPs.
So far I am aware of these Gate/Master Servers.
