Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
The Locky ransomware is back, spreading via a massive wave of spam emails distributed by the Necurs botnet, but the campaign appears to be a half-baked effort because the ransomware is not able to encrypt files on modern Windows OS versions, locking files only on older Windows XP & Vista machines.
Locky's return to action is surprising but makes perfect sense.
There have been numerous clues hinting that the same group behind the Necurs botnet was also behind the Locky ransomware, and more recently, the Jaff ransomware, which many have considered Locky's successor.
As Necurs slowly switched to Jaff, the Necurs group stopped spreading Locky spam in May, most likely preferring the newer Jaff ransomware instead of the older Locky.
The Necurs group's long-term plan was foiled last week after security researchers from Kaspersky Labs found a flaw in Jaff's encryption routine and created a free utility to help infected victims recover their files without paying the ransom.
This was unexpected, as researchers were never able to crack Locky's encryption method, and many thought Jaff to be just as tough, if not harder.
Kaspersky's feat appears to have taken the Necurs group by surprise as well.
As soon as the free decrypter was made available, Jaff spam went down, and beginning yesterday, the Necurs group started distributing Locky once more.
This switch most likely happened because Locky's encryption was never cracked, and operators have a better chance of extorting ransom from infected hosts.
The new spam waves were detected by a large number of security researchers.
All reported that they had trouble infecting themselves on their test machines.
It was Cisco's Talos division that discovered why.
According to the company's experts, the Locky authors rushed to replace the decrypted Jaff version with Locky and made several errors in their deployment.
"Upon further investigation, we determined that on systems running Windows 7 or later with Data Execution Prevention (DEP) would cause the unpacker to fail," said Cisco Talos experts.
This means that only older OS versions such as XP and Vista are affected.
In their rush, the Locky authors most likely didn't notice this bug, as they put considerable resources into the ransomware's distribution, something they might not have done if they knew its ineffectiveness.
Cisco says spam for this new Locky variant accounted for nearly 7.2% of the Internet's entire email spam traffic.
That's an insanely massive spam wave for a ransomware that only targets less than 10% of the entire Windows userbase.
Furthermore, this Locky version comes with minimal changes from the version researchers spotted the last time, in May.
This Locky variant still uses the LOTPR extension at the end of encrypted files, and the same URL structure for C&C servers.
This confirms the theory that the Necurs operators rushed to deploy Locky after Kaspersky published the Jaff decrypter.
But there are also new wrinkles in this new Locky spam wave as well.
Vitaly Kremez, Flashpoint Director of Research, discovered that Locky uses a new method of launching the infected binary on targeted hosts.
Still vetting but wanted to share -> #Locky has a seemingly new execution method using ddeexec & Shortcut execution via "locky.exe" "%1" pic.twitter.com/61Ei0X4F6o
In addition, the Locky spam emails use new texts for the email subjects and body content, albeit they still pretend to be invoices, payment receipts, order confirmations, and so on.
These emails also packed file attachments differently, utilizing a double-nested ZIP structure.
The emails Bleeping Computer analyzed deliver a ZIP file with names in the format of eight random digits (e.g.
This initial ZIP file contains another ZIP file, which in turns contains an EXE file that runs Locky when executed.
Last but not least, this Locky version also added some anti-debugging protections that prevent the ransomware from running in virtual machines and other debug environments, which explains why researchers had a hard time analyzing it for the first few hours.
Overall, this particular Locky spam run seems to be a rushed effort, but we can expect the ransomware's operators to correct their flaws and start delivering a fixed version in the following days.
Below are other indicators of compromise for this latest Locky variant.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
There is no stopping it.
After recent attack of WannaCry ransomware, Semantic team said there is 2nd wave is still to come and attacks has increased drastically in past 2 years.
From 2015 to 2016, the number of ransomware attacks were total 2 million and rose 17.7 % from the previous year as per gotowebsecurity - http://gotowebsecurity.com/ransomware-getting-worse/.
It really dangerous to see such attacks.
Most of the offices still using older version and still struggling to adopt new technology.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
