Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Today a new Locky Ransomware variant was discovered by Rommel Joven that switches to the .lukitus extension for encrypted files.
It is important to note that if you are infected with this ransomware, you are not infected with the Lukitus Ransomware, as some sites may call it.
You are instead infected by Locky, which is using the .lukitus extension.
According to Derek Knight, this variant is currently being distributed via spam emails that have subject lines of < No Subject > or Emailing - CSI-034183_MB_S_7727518b6bab2, which contain zip or rar attachments with JS files.
When these JS files are executed, they will download the Locky executable from a remote site.
Once the file is downloaded and executed, it will scan the computer for files and encrypt them.
When this Locky variant encrypts a file it will modify the file name and then append the .lukitus.
When renaming the file, it uses the format [first_8_hexadecimal_chars_of_id]-[next_4_hexadecimal_chars_of_id]-[next_4_hexadecimal_chars_of_id]-[4_hexadecimal_chars]-[12_hexadecimal_chars].lukitus.
This means that a file named 1.png would be encrypted and named something like as E87091F1-D24A-922B-00F6B112-72BB7EA6EADF.lukitus.
When Locky has finished encrypting the computer, it will remove the downloaded executable and then display a ransom note that provides information on how to pay the ransom.
The names of these ransom notes have changed for this version to lukitus.htm and lukitus.bmp.
At the time of this writing, the Locky Decryptor TOR payment site has the ransom set to .49 BTC or approximately $2,000 USD.
Unfortunately, at this time it is still not possible to decrypt .lukitus files encrypted by the Locky Ransomware for free.
The only way to recover encrypted files is via a backup, or if you are incredibly lucky, through Shadow Volume Copies.
Though Locky does attempt to remove Shadow Volume Copies, in rare cases ransomware infections fail to do so for whatever reason.
Due to this, if you do not have a viable backup, I always suggest people try as a last resort to restore encrypted files from Shadow Volume Copies as well.
For those who wish to discuss the Locky ransomware or need support, you can use our dedicated Locky Ransomware Help & Support Topic.
In order to protect yourself from Locky, or from any ransomware, it is important that you use good computing habits and security software.
First and foremost, you should always have a reliable and tested backup of your data that can be restored in the case of an emergency, such as a ransomware attack.
You should also have security software that contains behavioral detections such as Emsisoft Anti-Malware or Malwarebytes.
I also recommend trying a dedicated ransomware protection program like RansomFree.
Last, but not least, make sure you practice the following good online security habits, which in many cases are the most important steps of all:
For a complete guide on ransomware protection, you visit our How to Protect and Harden a Computer against Ransomware article.
Update 8/16/17 7:21 PM - Updated with information about spam distribution.
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
FIN12 hits healthcare with quick and focused ransomware attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
