Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
For at least the last two years, Proofpoint researchers have observed a seasonal lull in activity around the Thanksgiving holiday and during the weeks between Christmas and Russian Orthodox Christmas (January 7).
Activity during the Thanksgiving 2017 holiday, however, was higher than in previous years, with multiple campaigns targeting a variety of regions.
Figure 1 shows a year-over-year comparison of message volume for the period of December 15-January 12.
The week leading up to Christmas 2016 had significantly higher volumes than during the same week in 2017, primarily due to Locky ransomware campaigns distributed by TA505.
Just before, we observed a slight jump in traffic around Christmas 2017 relative to both previous weeks in 2017 and the same week in 2017.
Unlike in 2016, some actors seemingly worked through that week during which we generally expect very limited activity.
Figure 1: 2016 vs 2017 volumes for malicious messages during the holidays
Because the activities of threat actor TA505 tend to obscure the campaigns of other threat actors, breaking down activity during this period by actor gives a better sense of the nature and diversity of malware involved in these campaigns over the holidays.
The following actors were actively conducting campaigns after December 22, 2017, but were inactive the year before between December 22, 2016, and January 2, 2017:
TA542 – We began tracking the actors behind Emotet in April of 2017 and as a result, did not track them during the 2016 holiday season.
TA542 campaigns have appeared consistently since they emerged in April and, during the Christmas week, we observed Emotet distributed via URLs that led to malicious Microsoft Word documents with embedded macros used to download the malware.
On at least one occasion during the Christmas week, Emotet also downloaded Zeus Panda.
This instance of Zeus Panda primarily targeted online retail sites during the holiday season.
In early 2017, TA505 took a nearly three month hiatus before resuming campaigns; this year, their campaigns resumed on January 11 after less than a two-week break around the Russian Orthodox Christmas.
It is worth noting that TA505 activity is highly dependent on the Necurs botnet, so some of their quiet periods may relate to botnet disruptions or maintenance.
However, we observed increases in activity from multiple actors this season, suggesting that this is not an artifact exclusively related to TA505 distribution.
TA544 – We observed a campaign targeting Japanese users dropping URLZone from malicious Microsoft Excel documents, which eventually led to a final Ursnif payload.
This was the first time in several months that we had seen this particular infection chain.
TA543 – We identified another Ursnif campaign, this time targeting Australian users, via malicious Microsoft Word documents during the Christmas season.
The campaign utilized a familiar theme, namely a billing notification lure using stolen branding for a widely recognized New Zealand-based accounting software company.
For years, threat actors typically avoided sending large, broad-based campaigns on major American and UK holidays and weekends.
However, that tendency appears to be changing, perhaps because of widening geographical targets, attempts to have malspam waiting in crowded inboxes when users return from holidays, or attempts to deliver malware when defenders within organizations are more likely to be out of the office.
Moreover, the heightened threat actor activity of the 2017-2018 holiday period reflects the broader trend of 2017 as whole, a year that saw fewer sustained disruptions in campaign activity by major threat actors.
Whatever the reason for the change, it appears that some seasonal trends may be shifting such that defenders and end users should be prepared at all times to deal with both high-volume and targeted campaigns across geographies.
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
