The malware known as Trickbot started off as a banking trojan that used phishing techniques – primarily malicious spam – to trick users into visiting copycat websites to steal their credentials.
Its authors continue to develop the already-troublesome malware by adding features designed to make it more difficult to counter.
Security researchers discovered a new module called spreader_x86.dll that contains two files, SsExecutor_x86.exe and screenLocker_x86.dll that form part of Trickbot’s new arsenal.
The first file, SsExecutor_x86.exe increases the malware’s evasion capabilities by attempting to add a link to the trojan's startup path by taking over registry use profiles to maintain persistence.
ScreenLocker_x86.dll, on the other hand, gives Trickbot behavior that is similar to ransomware, as it attempts to lock victims' machines.
The module's locking mechanism deploys after the main infection chain runs, which could indicate that it is being used to attack unpatched corporate networks.
The new functions could have been added to expand the monetization schemes – corporate networks will often have built-in security that prevents employees from visiting malicious URLs to minimize the impact of these kinds of attacks.
On the other hand, ransomware-style attacks could act as a backup strategy, as well as a proven source of revenue for the attackers.
Cybersecurity is like a cat and mouse game between security providers and malware authors.
While security vendors constantly update and refine their software with new technology and features, the same can be said about malware.
Thus, while traditional security methods have become effective at preventing threats from affecting an organization, there are methods of maximizing security with a proactive incident response strategy.
Cryptocurrency miners are examples of elusive malware that are on the rise in 2018.
Many of these kinds of malware work in the background, without showing obvious signs that they are already using resources for mining – something that can be problematic for certain traditional security solutions.
Employees that use personal laptops or works remotely compounds this issue, as perimeter-based security is even more limited in this scenario.
With a proactive incident response strategy, the organization's security personnel can collect and analyze endpoint data, as well as provide intelligence on how to detect similar future attacks.
A successful attack can be devastating to both a company’s finances and reputation, especially when it comes to threats that directly affect customers and shareholders.
Once an attack has done its damage to an organization, remediation can often take a large amount of time and resources.
This is why it's important to address threats before they can do their damage.
Other proactive incident response strategies that organizations can implement:
Add this infographic to your site:1.
Click on the box below.
Press Ctrl+A to select all.
Paste the code into your page (Ctrl+V).
Image will appear the same size as you see above.
In the first half of this year, cybersecurity strongholds were surrounded by cybercriminals waiting to pounce at the sight of even the slightest crack in defenses to ravage valuable assets.View the report
The upheavals of 2020 challenged the limits of organizations and users, and provided openings for malicious actors.
A robust cybersecurity posture can help equip enterprises and individuals amid a continuously changing threat landscape.View the 2020 Annual Cybersecurity Report
