Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
Threat actors regularly introduce novel vectors for distributing malware and especially prize those that allow code and command execution with minimal user interaction.
Colleagues at SpecterOps recently published research[1] on abuse of the SettingContent-ms file format.
Crafted SettingContent-ms files can be used to bypass certain Windows 10 defenses such as Attack Surface Reduction (ASR) and detection of OLE-embedded dangerous file formats.
Specifically, this file format currently allows execution of commands such as cmd.exe and PowerShell without prompts or user interaction.
Since the original publication of this approach, Proofpoint researchers have observed a number of actors -- “early adopters” -- abusing this file format by embedding it inside Microsoft Word and PDF documents.
While the combination of the technique with the Microsoft Word container was described in the initial research, embedding inside PDFs has not been documented and likely originated with another source.
We first observed an actor embedding SettingContent-ms inside a PDF on June 18.
However, on July 16 we observed a particularly large campaign with hundreds of thousands of messages attempting to deliver PDF attachments with an embedded SettingContent-ms file.
The messages in the campaign used a simple lure asking the user to open the attached PDF (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Example message used to deliver the malicious PDF
When opened, Adobe Reader displays a warning prompt, asking the user if they want to open the file, since it is attempting to run the embedded “downl.SettingContent-ms” via JavaScript.
Note that this prompt would be displayed for any file format embedded within a PDF, and is not caused by the SettingContent-ms file itself (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Adobe Reader presenting the user with a prompt to open the SettingContent-ms file
If the intended victim clicks the “OK” prompt to open the file, Windows would then run the SettingContent-ms file and the PowerShell command contained within the “DeepLink” element (Figure 3), which leads to the download and execution of the FlawedAmmyy RAT.
Figure 3: The SettingContent-ms file that contains the malicious PowerShell command
This campaign is noteworthy because we attribute it with high confidence to a financially motivated actor we refer to as TA505 [3,4].
TA505 tends to operate at very large scale and sets trends among financially motivated actors because of their reach and campaign volumes.
Our attribution is based on email messages, as well as payload and other identifying characteristics.
Whether well established (like TA505) or newer to the space, attackers are quick to adopt new techniques and approaches when malware authors and researchers publish new proofs of concept.
While not all new approaches gain traction, some may become regular elements through which threat actors rotate as they seek new means of distributing malware or stealing credentials for financial gain.
In this case, we see TA505 acting as an early adopter, adapting the abuse of SettingContent-ms files to a PDF-based attack delivered at significant scale.
We will continue to monitor ways in which threat actors use this approach in the weeks to come.
URL used to download FlawedAmmyy Loader
URL used to download the 2nd Stage FlawedAmmyy RAT
ET and ETPRO Suricata/Snort/ClamAV Signatures
2025408 || ET TROJAN Win32/FlawedAmmyy RAT CnC Checkin
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
