Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
A new CryptoMix Ransomware variant has been discovered that appends the .CLOP or .CIOP extension to encrypted files.
Of particular interest, is that this variant is now indicating that the attackers are targeting entire networks rather than individual computers.
This variant was discovered by MalwareHunterTeam, who has noticed that the developers are switching between different email addresses and slight variations in the extension.
Signed & low detected (as usual), yesterday evening build of CryptoMix Clop ransomware sample: https://t.co/20KMkc3S9X
Again some changes in the note, and now it has 3 email addresses...
Also, new mutex and "messages" too.
As we are always looking for weaknesses, if you are a victim of this variant and decide to pay the ransom, please send us the decryptor so we can take a look at it.
You can also discuss or receive support for Cryptomix ransomware infections in our dedicated Cryptomix Help & Support Topic.
It has been quite a while since we covered a new CryptoMix variant and some things have changed since then.
This variant is currently being distributed using executables that have been code-signed with a digital signature.
Doing so makes the executable appear more legitimate and may help to bypass security software detections.
In an analysis by security researcher Vitali Kremez, when started this variant will first stop numerous Windows services and processes in order to disable antivirus software and close all files so that they are ready for encryption.
Examples of processes that are shutdown include Microsoft Exchange, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, BackupExec, and more.
Another item noticed by BleepingComputer in this variant is that it will create a batch file named clearnetworkdns_11-22-33.bat that will be executed soon after the ransomware is launched.
This batch file will disable Windows's automatic startup repair, remove shadow volume copies, and then resize them in order to clear orphaned shadow volume copies.
The ransomware will then begin to encrypt a victims files.
When encrypting files it will append the .Clop or .CIop extension to the encrypted file's name.
For example, a test file encrypted by this variant has an encrypted file name of test.jpg.CIop.
This variant will also create a ransom note named CIopReadMe.txt that is now indicating that they are targeting an entire network rather than an individual computer.
Whether this is true or not is not known at this time, as the ransomware itself does not have the ability to self-propagate, but could be done manually if the attackers are hacking into Remote Desktop Services.
This ransom note also contain the emails unlock@eqaltech.su, unlock@royalmail.su, and kensgilbomet@protonmail.com that can be used to contact the attackers for payment instructions.
Unfortunately, at this time the ransomware cannot be decrypted for free.
You can receive support or discuss Cryptomix ransomware infections in our dedicated Cryptomix Help & Support Topic.
In order to protect yourself from ransomware it is important that you use good computing habits and security software.
The most important step is to always have a reliable and tested backup of your data that can be restored in the case of an emergency, such as a ransomware attack.
You should also make sure that you do not have any computers running remote desktop services connected directly to the Internet.
Instead place computers running remote desktop behind VPNs so that they are only accessible to those who have VPN accounts on your network.
A good security software solution that incorporates behavioral detections to combat ransomware and not just use signature detections or heuristics is important as well.
For example, Emsisoft Anti-Malware and Malwarebytes Anti-Malware both contain behavioral detection that can prevent many, if not most, ransomware infections from encrypting a computer.
Last, but not least, make sure you practice the following security habits, which in many cases are the most important steps of all:
For a complete guide on ransomware protection, you visit our How to Protect and Harden a Computer against Ransomware article.
Ukraine arrests Clop ransomware gang members, seizes servers
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
