Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Maastricht University (UM) disclosed that it paid the 30 bitcoin ransom requested by the attackers who encrypted some of its critical systems following a cyberattack that took place on December 23, 2019.
UM is a university from the Netherlands with roughly 4,500 employees, 18,000 students, and 70,000 alumni, placed in the top 500 universities in the world by five different ranking tables during the last two years.
"Part of our technical infrastructure was affected during the attack.
That infrastructure consists of 1,647 Linux and Windows servers and 7,307 workstations," the university explains in a management summary of the Fox-IT incident report and UM's response.
"The attack ultimately focused on 267 servers of the Windows domain.
The attacker focused on encrypting data files in the Windows domain.
The backup of a limited number of systems was also affected."
UM says that all critical systems now have online and offline backups to avoid facing a future total failure scenario in the event of another ransomware attack.
"The modus operandi of the group behind this specific attack comes over with a criminal group that already has one has a long history, and goes back to at least 2014," says Fox-IT in its full report to UM (in Dutch).
TA505 (also tracked SectorJ04) is a financially motivated hacker group known for mainly targeting retail companies and financial institutions since at least Q3 2014.
According to Fox-IT, the hackers were able to infiltrate the university's systems via two phishing e-mails that were opened on two UM systems on October 15 and 16.
Until November 21 when they gained admin rights on an unpatched machine, the attackers moved through UM's network compromising servers left and right until it finally deployed the Clop ransomware payload on 267 Windows systems.
The university paid the ransom to have the files decrypted on December 30 after closely analyzing the options including rebuilding all infected systems from scratch or attempting to create a decryptor.
"During the investigation, traces were found that show that the attacker collected data regarding the topology of the network, usernames, and passwords of multiple accounts, and other network architecture information," the report summary says.
Also, Fox-IT says that it "did not find any traces within the scope of the investigation that point to the collection of other types of data."
After the attack, UM secured the services of security company Fox-IT to assist with the incident's forensic investigation, the crisis management process, and to provide advice during the recovery according to official statements part of a press conference from February 5.
While UM added that the forensic research "indicates how cybercriminals have taken some of UM's data hostage," research and personal data was not exfiltrated.
However, the university will continue investigating if this conclusion is 100% accurate via "follow-up research into possible extraction" of important data files representative of education, research, and business operations as Fox-IT recommends.
UM also disclosed that it acquired the ransomware decryptor from the attackers by paying a 30 bitcoin ransom (roughly $220,000 or €220,000) to restore all the encrypted files as Reuters reported.
This allowed UM to avoid having to rebuild all the compromised systems from scratch, losing all the research, educational, and staff data and delaying exams and salary payments to the university's 4,500 employees.
"It is a decision that was not taken lightly by the Executive Board.
But it was also a decision that had to be made," UM says.
"We felt, in consultation with our management and our supervisory bodies, that we could not make any other responsible choice when considering the interests of our students and staff.
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Sandhills online machinery markets shut down by ransomware attack
The Week in Ransomware - October 1st 2021 - "This was preventable"
JVCKenwood hit by Conti ransomware claiming theft of 1.5TB data
Second farming cooperative shut down by ransomware this week
it`s very terrible hackers attack for university!
Free vacation for the students!
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
