Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Three more ransomware families have created sites that are being used to leak the stolen data of non-paying victims and further illustrates why all ransomware attacks must be considered data breaches.
Ever since Maze created their "news" site to publish stolen data of their victims who choose not to pay, other ransomware actors such as Sodinokibi/REvil, Nemty, and DoppelPaymer have been swift to follow.
Over the past two days, BleepingComputer has learned of another three ransomware families who have now launched their data leak sites, which are listed below.
While we have been saying it for a long time, with the continued release of data leak sites, ransomware attacks must be treated as data breaches now that the personal and private data of employees is being published online.
To make matters worse, other threat actors are taking the data exposed in these leaks and selling it on hacker forums so it can be utilized in other attacks.
The Nefilim Ransomware has launched a site called "Corporate Leaks" that is being used to dump the data of victims who do not pay a ransom.
Nefilim is fairly new and is believed to be a new version of the Nemty Ransomware.
This leak site currently lists two companies who both are involved with energy or resources.
The CLOP Ransomware has also released a leak site called "CL0P^_- LEAKS" that they are using to publish stolen data for non-paying victims.
The CLOP Ransomware made news recently after it attacked the Maastricht University and was paid 30 bitcoins to recover their data.
The site currently lists four different companies whose data has been released.
Finally, a relatively new ransomware called Sekhmet has also released a data leak site called "Leaks leaks and leaks".
Not much is known about this ransomware other than that their ransom note is named "RECOVER-FILES.txt".
Their leak site only lists one company at this time.
Ukraine arrests Clop ransomware gang members, seizes servers
Trucking giant Forward Air reports ransomware data breach
United Health Centers ransomware attack claimed by Vice Society
REvil ransomware is back in full attack mode and leaking data
The Week in Ransomware - September 10th 2021 - REvil returns
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
