Exclusive: The Clop ransomware gang is demanding more than $20 million from German tech firm Software AG.
Software AG, one of the largest software companies in the world, has suffered a ransomware attack over the last weekend, and the company has not yet fully recovered from the incident.
A ransomware gang going by the name of "Clop" has breached the company's internal network on Saturday, October 3, encrypted files, and asked for more than $20 million to provide the decryption key.
Earlier today, after negotiations failed, the Clop gang published screenshots of the company's data on a website the hackers operate on the dark web (a so-called leak site).
The screenshots show employee passport and ID scans, employee emails, financial documents, and directories from the company's internal network.
Software AG disclosed the incident on Monday when it revealed it was facing disruptions on its internal network "due to [a] malware attack."
The company said that services to customers, including its cloud-based services, remained unaffected and that it was not aware "of any customer information being accessed by the malware attack."
This statement was recanted in a later press release two days later, when Software AG admitted to finding evidence of data theft.
The message about the attack remained on its official website homepage all week, including today.
Software AG did not return phone calls today for additional details or comments about the incident.
A copy of the ransomware binary used against Software AG was discovered earlier this week by security researcher MalwareHunterTeam.
The $20+ million ransom demand is one of the largest ransom demands ever requested in a ransomware attack.
The ID provided in this ransom note allows security researchers to view the online chats between the Clop gang and Software AG on a web portal managed by the ransomware group.
At the time of writing, there is no evidence the German company paid the ransom demand.
Software AG is Germany's second-largest company with more than 10,000 enterprise customers across 70 countries.
Some of the company's most recognizable customers include Fujitsu, Telefonica, Vodafone, DHL, and Airbus.
Its product line includes business infrastructure software such as database systems, enterprise service bus (ESB) frameworks, software architecture (SOA), and business process management systems (BPMS).
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
