A ransomware attack is believed to have impaired the chain's ability to issue invoices and accept loyalty cards.
A security incident described as "a cyber-attack" has crippled some business operations at INA Group, Croatia's biggest oil company, and its largest petrol station chain.
The attack took place last Friday, on February 14, at 22:00, local time, the company said.
Multiple sources have told ZDNet the cyber-attack is a ransomware infection that infected and then encrypted some of the company's backend servers.
The incident did not impact the company's ability to provide petrol fuel to its customers, nor its ability to handle payments.
It did, however, impact its ability to issue invoices, register loyalty card use, issue new mobile vouchers, issue new electronic vignettes, and allow customers to pay gas utility bills (INA is also a natural gas provider in Croatia).
The INA Group, which is part of the MOL Group and lists the Croatian government as its biggest shareholder, publicly disclosed the incident over the weekend and apologized to customers.
A company spokesperson did not return emails or phone calls for additional details.
In a message posted on its website, the company said it was working to restore all systems, however, its services were still down today.
A source familiar with the incident has told ZDNet this week that the ransomware incident has been caused by an infection with the CLOP ransomware strain.
While we couldn't get INA to confirm, open-source reporting supports our source's tip.
For example, hours before INA reported being infected, a Sophos malware analyst reported a new malware command-and-control server going live and being involved in CLOP-related operations.
#Cobalt C2 used in #CLOP ransomware attack: https://t.co/OJluaAPeLV
Furthermore, this week, security researchers have also spotted new versions of the CLOP ransomware on VirusTotal, an aggregated malware scanning service [1, 2, 3].
The use of the CLOP ransomware in the attack against INA also fits the bill when it comes to CLOP's regular modus operandi.
According to BleepingComputer, a tech news site specialized in ransomware news and research, the operators of the CLOP ransomware switched tactics in March 2019 from targeting end-users to targeting companies.
The CLOP gang is now what security researchers call "big-game ransomware," which is a term referring to criminal groups that specifically target companies to infect their networks, encrypt data, and ask for extremely large ransom demands.
Thanks for the suggestions, here is my current list of ransomware groups targeting large enterprises.
I know i'm missing some, but i think we can agree if all these disappeared the world would be a better place.
They aren't in a particular order but I did need to put Ryuk first.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
