Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Clop ransomware is claiming to have stolen 2 million credit cards from E-Land Retail over a one-year period ending with last months ransomware attack.
E-Land Retail, a subsidiary of E-Land Global, operates numerous retail clothing stores, including New Core and NC Department Store.
Last month, E-Land Retail had to shut down 23 NC Department Store and New Core locations after suffering a CLOP ransomware attack.
At the time of the attack, E-Land Retail stated that sensitive customer data was safe as it was encrypted on another server.
"Although this ransomware attack caused some damage to the company's network and system, Customer information and sensitive data are encrypted on a separate server."
"It is in a safe state because it is managed," E-Land Retail CEO Chang-Hyun Seok disclosed in a notice on their web site.
However, in an interview with BleepingComputer, the CLOP ransomware operators claimed to have breached E-Land over a year ago and have been quietly stealing credit cards using POS malware installed on the network.
"Over a year ago, we hacked their network, everything is as usual.
We thought what to do, installed POS malware and left it for a year.
Before the lock, the cards were collected and deciphered, for a whole year the company did not suspect and did nothing," the CLOP gang told BleepingComputer.
Using the installed POS malware, CLOP told BleepingComputer that they stole the Track 2 data for 2 million credit cards over the past year.
POS malware is used to scan the memory of point-of-sale (POS) terminals as credit card transactions occur.
When credit card data is detected, the malware copies the credit card information as Track 1 or Track 2 data and transmits it back to the threat actor's server.
The stolen credit cards that CLOP claims to have stolen are in the form of Track 2 data, which includes a credit card number, the expiration date, and other information.
It does not, though, contain a credit cards CVV code, so threat actors can only use it to create fake credit cards for in-store purchases.
CLOP also told BleepingComputer that they targeted approximately 90k IP addresses, but are unsure as to how many were actually encrypted.
BleepingComputer has made repeated attempts to contact E-Land Global and E-Land Retail but have not received a reply to our emails.
Ukraine arrests Clop ransomware gang members, seizes servers
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Russian orgs heavily targeted by smaller tier ransomware gangs
Engineering giant Weir Group hit by ransomware attack
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
