
          By Brittany Barbehenn, Doel Santos and Brad Duncan
October 29, 2020 at 5:45 PM
Tags: BazaLoader, joint cybersecurity alert, malware, ransomware, Ryuk, threat assessment, Trickbot
This post is also available in: 
    日本語 (Japanese)
On Oct. 28, 2020, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) released a joint cybersecurity alert regarding an increased and imminent cybersecurity threat to the U.S. healthcare system.
Threat operators have displayed a heightened interest in targeting the healthcare and the public health sector, potentially disrupting healthcare services and operations.
Activities observed include the use of Trickbot malware, a well-known information stealer that can lead to the installation of other malicious files, including Ryuk ransomware.
This alert comes shortly after Universal Health Services (UHS) reported a Ryuk ransomware attack that disrupted all U.S. UHS sites for weeks.
Other U.S.-based hospitals have reported similar ransomware attacks, including a hospital in Oregon and one in New York.
Similarly, a health tech organization in Philadelphia was also the target of a ransomware attack.
Palo Alto Networks security subscriptions for the Next-Generation Firewall with WildFire detects activity associated with Trickbot and Ryuk.
The DNS Security subscription is able to detect the Anchor_DNS DNS tunneling described in this blog.
Cortex XDR also contains an Anti-Ransomware Protection module and an Anti-Malware Protection module, which target encryption-based activities associated with ransomware and other malicious file behaviors.
Additionally, AutoFocus customers can review activity related to this threat activity with the following tags: Ryuk, Trickbot and BazaLoader.
Trickbot is modular malware that provides backdoor access, enabling operators to distribute additional malware onto victim systems, and includes other capabilities such as worm functionality and system enumeration.
One of the newest modules, Anchor_DNS, is used for DNS tunneling during command and control (C2) actions.
The Anchor_DNS module uses PowerShell to run scripts and makes multiple DNS requests including connectivity checks to benign legitimate domains.
Malware often does this to confirm an active network connection that will allow the threat operator to communicate with that system during C2 activities.
The following legitimate domains may be used during this check:
Legitimate domains used by Trickbot Anchor_DNS module to conduct internet connectivity checks.
Ryuk ransomware is typically denoted by a file named “RyukReadMe” placed onto the system.
This ransomware is often seen at the end of multi-stage attacks involving malware such as Trickbot and, more recently, BazaLoader (also known as "BazarLoader").
In many cases, Ryuk is not loaded onto the system until weeks or months after the initial infection.
Ryuk operators learn the victim network by enumerating the impacted environment with tools that may be familiar to that environment, such as PowerShell and Windows Management Instrumentation.
Prior to encryption, the following commands may be run on a compromised system:
You can review the joint cybersecurity advisory for additional details on Ryuk and Trickbot activities associated with the targeting of Healthcare and the Public Health Sector.
The initial intrusion vector for both Trickbot and BazaLoader infections is most often observed through malicious emails.
You can find recently confirmed Trickbot samples on MalwareBazaar and additional information on Trickbot modules on the Unit 42 blog.
Recent samples of Ryuk and BazaLoader can also be found on MalwareBaazar.
More information on ransomware can be found in the 2021 Unit 42 Ransomware Threat Report.
This section documents the relevant tactics and techniques associated with Ryuk and Trickbot activities and maps them directly to Palo Alto Networks product(s) and service(s).
Palo Alto Networks customers can utilize this table to verify current configurations within their environments.
Courses of Action for Ryuk and Trickbot.
†These capabilities are part of the NGFW security subscriptions service.
Ryuk ransomware infections often result from multi-stage threat activities originating from malware such as Trickbot and BazaLoader.
Once the backdoor malware is established, attackers use tools such as PowerShell and CobaltStrike to attain remote connection and drop Ryuk onto the compromised system, sometimes weeks to months after initial infection.
The U.S. Government has deemed this threat activity as an imminent threat to Healthcare and the Public Health Sector industry.
Indicators associated with this Threat Assessment and the joint cybersecurity alert are available on GitHub, have been published to the Unit 42 TAXII feed and are viewable via the ATOM Viewer:
Palo Alto Networks security subscriptions for the Next-Generation Firewall with WildFire detect activity associated with Trickbot and Ryuk.
The DNS Security subscription is able to detect the Anchor_DNS DNS tunneling described in this blog.
Cortex XDR also contains an Anti-Ransomware Protection module as well as an Anti-Malware Protection module, which targets encryption-based activities associated with ransomware and other malicious file behaviors.
Additionally, AutoFocus customers can review activity related to this threat activity with the following tags: Ryuk, Trickbot and BazaLoader.
Palo Alto Networks has shared our findings, including file samples and indicators of compromise, in this report with our fellow Cyber Threat Alliance members.
CTA members use this intelligence to rapidly deploy protections to their customers and to systematically disrupt malicious cyber actors.
For more information on the Cyber Threat Alliance, visit www.cyberthreatalliance.org.
Alert (AA20-302A) - Ransomware Activity Targeting the Healthcare and Public Health Sector
Sign up to receive the latest news, cyber threat intelligence and research from us
Please enter your email address!
Please mark, I'm not a robot!
By submitting this form, you agree to our Terms of Use and acknowledge our Privacy Statement.
© 2021 Palo Alto Networks, Inc. All rights reserved.
