Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Indian conglomerate Indiabulls Group has allegedly been hit with a cyberattack from the CLOP Ransomware operators who have leaked screenshots of stolen data.
The Indiabulls Group is an Indian conglomerate with $3.5 billion in revenue (2019), over 19,000 employees, and subsidiaries focusing on housing, personal finance and lending, infrastructure, and pharmaceuticals.
"The Indiabulls Group is a diversified financial services group with interests in housing finance, consumer finance and personal wealth.
The Group also has a presence in Real Estate, Pharmaceuticals, Lighting and Infrastructure & Construction Equipment Leasing.
The group has a net worth of more than ₹ 28,580 Cr.
(as on 31st March, 2019)," states their about page.
The CLOP Ransomware operators claimed to have breached Indiabulls and have posted screenshots of files that they have allegedly stolen during the attack.
When performing a ransomware attack, the CLOP threat actors are known to steal unencrypted files before deploying the ransomware.
These files are then posted on their 'CL0P^_- LEAKS' data leak site with a threat that more data will be leaked if the ransom demand is not paid.
Today, the CLOP threat actors have uploaded screenshots of six stolen files with the message of "Contact us in 24H."
The leaked documents include a voucher, a letter, and four spreadsheets related to the Indiabulls Pharmaceuticals and Indiabulls Housing Finance Limited subsidiaries.
It is not known how much CLOP is demanding for a ransom or when the attack occurred.
Cyberintelligence firm Bad Packets told BleepingComputer, though, that Indiabulls has an Citrix Netscaler ADC VPN gateway exposed, which is vulnerable to the CVE-2019-19781 vulnerability.
It is not known if this is how they were potentially breached.
Threat intel firm Bad Packets said that its internet-wide scans had discovered last year that the fintech company had run unpatched servers for a long time, leaving its systems exposed to attacks.
In March, the CLOP Ransomware operators also conducted an attack against U.S pharmaceutical company ExecuPharm when they stole 163GB of unencrypted files.
Since then, the ransomware actors have leaked it all on their data leak site after not being paid.
BleepingComputer has contacted both CLOP and Indiabulls but has not received a response as of yet.
Update 6/22/20: Added information about vulnerable Netscaler device.
Ukraine arrests Clop ransomware gang members, seizes servers
The Week in Ransomware - September 10th 2021 - REvil returns
Hackers leak passwords for 500,000 Fortinet VPN accounts
REvil ransomware's servers mysteriously come back online
Ransomware gang threatens to leak data if victim contacts FBI, police
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
