Join thousands of people who receive the latest breaking cybersecurity news every day.
The administrator of your personal data will be Threatpost, Inc., 500 Unicorn Park, Woburn, MA 01801.
Detailed information on the processing of personal data can be found in the privacy policy.
In addition, you will find them in the message confirming the subscription to the newsletter.
The administrator of your personal data will be Threatpost, Inc., 500 Unicorn Park, Woburn, MA 01801.
Detailed information on the processing of personal data can be found in the privacy policy.
In addition, you will find them in the message confirming the subscription to the newsletter.
A group of four people calling themselves “Pentaguard” were arrested in house raids.
A cybercriminal gang have been arrested for spreading the Locky ransomware among hospitals, among other crimes.
In an operation spearheaded by Romania’s law enforcement department, four people have been taken into custody after their houses were raided – three in Romania and one in neighboring Moldova.
Prosecutors at the Directorate for Investigating Organized Crime and Terrorism (DIICOT) are charging the group with illegal operations with computer devices and programs, illegal access to a computer system, alteration of computer data integrity and computer forgery.
According to a media statement from DIICOT [translated with Google Translate], the crime group formed at the beginning of the year, calling themselves “Pentaguard.”
There were two prongs of their operation.
First, they used SQL injection to compromise and deface websites, targeting websites operated by “several public institutions (institutions of central and local public administration, government) and private (financial-banking, cultural, education, etc.
), in Romania and the Republic of Moldova.”
Secondly, they distributed ransomware like Locky to carry out extortion campaigns; and they spread remote access trojans (RATs) to help them steal data.
These attacks were directed against several public institutions both in Bucharest and elsewhere, and more were planned.
“The information we have obtained so far showed that they intended to launch attacks, including ransomware attacks, in the near future, on some public health institutions in Romania (generally hospitals),” according to the release.
They used “social engineering by sending a malicious executable application, from the ‘Locky’ or ‘BadRabbit’ (computer virus) families, hidden in an e-mail and in the form of a file that apparently would come from other government institutions, regarding the threat of COVID-19.”
The infamous Maze ransomware group and others said that they would back off amidst the coronavirus pandemic – before coming back in that sector with a vengeance.
Overall, healthcare organizations of all stripes continue to be attacked.
For instance, in April, the Clop ransomware group attacked biopharmaceutical company ExecuPharm and leaked “select corporate and personnel information” on underground forums in what’s known as a double-extortion attack.
ExecuPharm, a Pennsylvania-based subsidiary of the U.S. biopharmaceutical giant Parexel, provides clinical trial management tools for biopharmaceutical companies.
The attack was initiated through phishing emails that were sent to ExecuPharm employees.
Concerned about the IoT security challenges businesses face as more connected devices run our enterprises, drive our manufacturing lines, track and deliver healthcare to patients, and more?
On June 3 at 2 p.m.
ET, join renowned security technologist Bruce Schneier, Armis CISO Curtis Simpson and Threatpost for a FREE webinar, Taming the Unmanaged and IoT Device Tsunami.
Get exclusive insights on how to manage this new and growing attack surface.
Please register here for this sponsored webinar.
Threatpost editors discuss the SolarWinds hack, healthcare ransomware attacks and other threats that will plague enterprises in 2021.
An examination of the malware gang’s payments reveals insights into its economic operations.
The agency said the malware has already compromised more than 150 organizations and provided insight into its ransomware-as-a-service behavior.

Jason

                            on May 20, 2020
Join thousands of people who receive the latest breaking cybersecurity news every day.
The rare #UEFI #bootkit drops a fully featured #backdoor on PCs and gains the ultimate persistence by modifying the… https://t.co/YXOpYszUZc
Get the latest breaking news delivered daily to your inbox.
The First Stop For Security News
Infosec Insider content is written by a trusted community of Threatpost cybersecurity subject matter experts.
Each contribution has a goal of bringing a unique voice to important cybersecurity topics.
Content strives to be of the highest quality, objective and non-commercial.
Sponsored Content is paid for by an advertiser.
Sponsored content is written and edited by members of our sponsor community.
This content creates an opportunity for a sponsor to provide insight and commentary from their point-of-view directly to the Threatpost audience.
The Threatpost editorial team does not participate in the writing or editing of Sponsored Content.
