For the past month or so, I hadn't had any luck finding active malspam campaigns pushing Dridex malware.
That changed starting this week, and I've since found several examples.
Today's diary reviews an infection from Wednesday September 9th, 2020.
While searching VirusTotal, I found three documents with the same template that generated the same type of traffic (read: SHA256 hash - name):

Shown above:  Screenshot with template used by all three of the above listed Word documents.
My lab environment revealed these documents are designed to infect a vulnerable Windows host with Dridex.
Enabling macros caused Powershell to retrieve a DLL file from one of the following URLs over encrypted HTTPS traffic:
After the DLL was saved under the victim's profile, it was run using rundll32.exe.
The DLL is an installer for Dridex, and it was run using the following command:

Shown above:  Location of the initial DLL to install Dridex on an infected Windows host.
Dridex post-infection traffic is all HTTPS.
In this case, we saw HTTPS traffic over the following IP addresses and ports:

Shown above:  Traffic from the Dridex infection filtered in Wireshark.
Most of the Dridex post-infection traffic I've seen uses IP addresses without domain names, and issuer data for the SSL/TLS certificates is somewhat unusual.
Certificate issuer data for the Dridex post-infection traffic:

Shown above:  Certificate issuer data for HTTPS traffic to 67.213.75[.
]205 over TCP port 443 found in Wireshark.

Shown above:  Certificate issuer data for HTTPS traffic to 54.39.34[.
]26 over TCP port 453 found in Wireshark.
Dridex persistent on an infected Windows host
Dridex is made persistent on an infected Windows host using 3 methods simultaneously:
Dridex uses copies of legitimate Windows system files (EXEs) to load and run malware.
Dridex DLL files are named as DLLs that would normally be run by these copied system EXEs.
For this infection, all of the persistent Dridex DLL files were 64-bit DLL files.

Shown above:  Windows registry update used to keep Dridex persistent on an infected host.

Shown above:  Legitimate EXE called by registry update, and Dridex DLL in the same directory.

Shown above:  Scheduled task on the same infected Windows host also used to keep Dridex persistent.

Shown above:  Legitimate EXE called by scheduled task, and Dridex DLL in the same directory.

Shown above:  Windows start menu shortcut also used to keep Dridex persistent on the same infected Windows host.

Shown above:  Legitimate EXE called by start menu shortcut, and Dridex DLL in the same directory.
Three examples of Microsoft Word documents with macros for Dridex:
Installer DLL for Dridex called by Word macro:
Dridex 64-bit DLL files persistent on the infected Windows host:
URLs from Word macro to retrieve Dridex DLL installer:
Certificate data for Dridex HTTPS traffic to 67.213.75[.
Certificate data for Dridex HTTPS traffic to 54.39.34[.
After a period of inactivity, malspam pushing Dridex malware is back, so this blog post reviewed traffic and malware from an infected Windows host.
While not much has changed, it's always good to have a refresher.
As usual, up-to-date Windows hosts with the latest security patches and users who follow best security practices are not likely to get infected with this malware.
However, I've seen so much come through in the past two or three days that even a small percentage of success will likely be profitable for the criminals behind it.
---
Brad Duncan
brad [at] malware-traffic-analysis.net
Sign Up for Free or Log In to start participating in the conversation!
Make the web a better place by sharing the SANS Internet Storm Center with others
