Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
A ransomware operation known as 'Clop' is applying maximum pressure on victims by emailing their customers and asking them to demand a ransom payment to protect their privacy.
A common tactic used by ransomware operations is to steal unencrypted data before encrypting a victim's network.
This data is then used in a double-extortion tactic where they threaten to release the data if a ransom is not paid.
When data is published, it can be damaging to the victim and their customers, as the stolen data could contain personal information, credit cards, social security numbers, and even government-issued identification.
After the Clop gang stole data from jet maker Bombardier in an Accellion hack, they leaked a small amount on their ransomware data leak site.
A week later, the threat actors began emailing journalists to let them know that further data would be released.
As Bombardier had already disclosed the data breach, this tactic did not work as hoped by the threat actors.
However, Clop has now taken it a step further and directly emailed victims' customers found in files or database dumps stolen during the ransomware attack.
The tactic first started with Flagstar Bank customers and then with people exposed in the University of Colorado's Accellion hack.
In an email seen by BleepignComputer, Clop is now using the same tactic to the customers of an online maternity clothing store, which will not be naming.
In these emails, Clop is sending customers threatening emails with the subject "Your personal data has been stolen and will be published."
These emails say that the recipient is being contacted as they are a customer of the store, and their personal data, including phone numbers, email addresses, and credit card information, will soon be published if the store does not pay a ransom.
"Perhaps you bought something there and left your personal data.
Such as phone, email, address, credit card information and social security number," the Clop gang states in the email.
Clop then tells the customer to "Call or write to this store and ask to protect your privacy!!!!"
In other words, the Clop gang is hoping that if enough customers contact the store about their stolen data, the store will pay the ransom to prevent the data from being published.
While I do not think this tactic will work, it illustrates the continuing pressure ransomware gangs apply to victims by leaking their data and scaring their customers.
Clop is not alone in their attempts to apply maximum pressure on victims to get them to pay ransoms.
Earlier this month, we reported that the REvil ransomware operation was planning on DDoSing victims or making VOIP calls to victims' customers to apply further pressure.
Sadly, regardless of whether a ransom is paid, consumers whose data has been stolen are still at risk as there is no way of knowing if ransomware gangs delete the data as they promise.
Trucking giant Forward Air reports ransomware data breach
Ukraine arrests Clop ransomware gang members, seizes servers
REvil ransomware is back in full attack mode and leaking data
Nokia subsidiary discloses data breach after Conti ransomware attack
T-Mobile data breach just got worse — now at 54 million customers
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
