Real Intrusions by Real Attackers, The Truth Behind the Intrusion
“TrickBot malware—first identified in 2016—is a Trojan developed and operated by a sophisticated group of cybercrime actors.
The cybercrime group initially designed TrickBot as a banking trojan to steal financial data.
Through continued development and new functionality, TrickBot has become a highly modular, multi-stage malware that provides its operators a full suite of tools to conduct a myriad of illegal cyber activities.
Since TrickBot’s inception, the cybercrime group has used the malware to attack individuals and businesses globally across a wide range of sectors.”
Source – Fact Sheet: TrickBot Malware Source
In an intrusion this past month, threat actors were seen enumerating and collecting information related to the domain as well as dumping passwords before leaving the network.
Multiple Cobalt Strike Beacons were deployed and remained connected despite the lack of activity from the threat actors.
We assess, with moderate confidence, the Trickbot DLL that we executed was originally delivered via a malicious Office document.
The threat actors were observed leveraging Trickbot and Cobalt Strike for C2 communication.
They began their discovery by running net and nltest commands as well as PowerView domain discovery modules.
Minutes later, Lazagne (“retrieve lots of passwords”) was executed using the “all” switch.
A registry value was set to enable storing logon credentials in plaintext in memory (WDigest), likely to facilitate future activity as the host was not restarted for this change to take effect.
Before the threat actors departed the network, they successfully accessed the LSASS process and retrieved credentials from memory.
No lateral movement or execution on mission was observed.
Analysis and reporting completed by @kostastsale, @ICSNick, and @RoxpinTeddy.
We assess with moderate confidence that this DLL was dropped by a malicious Office document.
Trickbot (click.php.dll) was manually executed on a single endpoint.
Trickbot, from its injected wermgr process, spawned a command process to then run a PowerShell Cobalt Strike Beacon.
Reviewing the above PowerShell code, we can extract the shellcode to discover the IP and User-agent string, the beacon will communicate with.
Getting the IP and port using scdbg.
The threat actor also executed a second Cobalt Strike Beacon (wsuC3C.tmp) using the injected wermgr.exe process.
A scheduled task was created to keep the Trickbot malware persistent on the system.
Trickbot injected into wermgr.exe processes and used this for communication to command and control infrastructure.
Lazagne was used with the “all” switch, which runs all modules.
Below we can see registry hives being saved to disk.
LSASS was accessed by rundll32, but we did not see anything written to disk.
Trickbot was used to enable the storage of clear text credentials (WDigest) by setting UseLogonCredential to 1.
The following net commands were used by the threat actor from the injected Trickbot process.
The following nltest commands were used by the threat actor from the injected Trickbot process.
PowerView modules were also used by the threat actor executed from the Cobalt Strike beacons.
The local network was scanned for port 445/SMB.
ipconfig was used to show all IP info.
]200:80 (Our Threat Feed service has known about this Cobalt Strike server since at least 4-4-2021)
]39:443 (Our Threat Feed service has known about this Cobalt Strike server since at least 4-12-2021)wideri[.
Aside from the initial compromise on the beachhead host and the stolen credentials, no further impact was observed during this intrusion.
No lateral movement or execution on mission was observed.
Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Intro The Ryuk threat actors went from a phishing email to domain wide ransomware in 5 hours.
They escalated privileges using Zerologon (CVE-2020-1472), less than 2 hours after the initial … Read More
Intro The Ryuk group went from an email to domain wide ransomware in 29 hours and asked for over $6 million to unlock our systems.
They used tools such as … Read More
The threat actor logged in through RDP, attempted to run a Cobalt Strike Beacon, and then dumped memory using ProcDump and Mimikatz.
Next, they RDPed into a Domain Controller, minutes … Read More
Here’s another example of threat actors brute forcing RDP to install ransomware, this time the brute forced system was not using the default RDP port.
The threat actors installed ransomware … Read More
