
W32.Disttrack is a new threat that is being used in specific targeted attacks against at least one organization in the energy sector.
It is a destructive malware that corrupts files on a compromised computer and overwrites the MBR (Master Boot Record) in an effort to render a computer unusable.
W32.Disttrack consists of several components:

Dropper—the main component and source of the original infection.
It drops a number of other modules.
Wiper—this module is responsible for the destructive functionality of the threat.
Reporter—this module is responsible for reporting infection information back to the attacker.
The driver is used to overwrite the computer’s MBR but may be used for legitimate purposes.
The file is digitally signed


Executes the following commands that collect file names, which will be overwritten and writes them to f1.inf and f2.inf:


 

Files from the f1.inf and f2.inf will be overwritten with the JPEG image shown below.
Overwritten files are thus rendered useless.
Symantec Security Response is continuing to analyze this threat and will post more information as it becomes available.
Symantec customers are protected from this threat, which our security products detect as W32.Disttrack.
W32.Disttrack is a new threat that is being used in specific targeted attacks against at least one organization in the energy sector.
It is a destructive malware that corrupts files on a compromised computer and overwrites the MBR (Master Boot Record) in an effort to render a computer unusable.
W32.Disttrack consists of several components:
The Dropper component performs the following actions:
The Wiper component includes the following functionality:
Image used to overwrite files
The following string that points to the location of debug symbols was left in the Wiper component of this threat and gives an idea of where the component was located on the developer’s computer:
	C:\Shamoon\ArabianGulf\wiper\release\wiper.pdb
The Reporter component is responsible for sending infection information back to the attacker.
Information is sent as a HTTP GET request and is structured as follows:
	http://[DOMAIN]/ajax_modal/modal/data.asp?mydata=[MYDATA]&uid=[UID]&state=[STATE]
The following data is sent to the attacker:
Threats with such destructive payloads are unusual and are not typical of targeted attacks.
Symantec Security Response is continuing to analyze this threat and will post more information as it becomes available.
Symantec customers are protected from this threat, which our security products detect as W32.Disttrack.
