APT34 hacking tools and victim data leaked on a secretive Telegram channel since last month.
In an incident reminiscent of the Shadow Brokers leak that exposed the NSA's hacking tools, someone has now published similar hacking tools belonging to one of Iran's elite cyber-espionage units, known as APT34, Oilrig, or HelixKitten.
The hacking tools are nowhere near as sophisticated as the NSA tools leaked in 2017, but they are dangerous nevertheless.
The tools have been leaked since mid-March on a Telegram channel by an individual using the Lab Dookhtegan pseudonym.
Besides hacking tools, Dookhtegan also published what appears to be data from some of APT34's hacked victims, mostly comprising of username and password combos that appear to have been collected through phishing pages.
ZDNet was previously aware of some of these tools and victim data after this reporter received a tip in mid-March.
In a Twitter DM, a Twitter user shared some of the same files that were discovered today on Telegram, and we believe that this Twitter user is the Telegram Lab Dookhtegan persona.
Furthermore, ZDNet has also learned that the same Twitter persona had also contacted tens of other reporters and infosec researchers with the same message, in an attempt to promote the leak.
Similarly, the same persona has also posted links to some of these hacking tools on public hacking-focused forums.
On these forums, he claimed to be selling the hacked files, yet, he never mentioned anything about a price.
Several cyber-security experts have already confirmed the authenticity of these tools.
Chronicle, Alphabet's cyber-security division, confirmed this to ZDNet earlier today.
In the Telegram channel discovered today, the hacker leaked  the source code of six hacking tools, and the content from several active backend panels, where victim data had been collected.
Besides source code for the above tools, Dookhtegan also leaked on the Telegram channel data taken from victims that had been collected in some of APT34's backend command-and-control (C&C) servers.
In total, according to Chronicle, Dookhtegan leaked data from 66 victims, mainly from countries in the Middle East, but also Africa, East Asia, and Europe.
Data was taken from both government agencies, but also from private companies.
The two biggest companies named on the Telegram channel are Etihad Airways and Emirates National Oil.
A list of the victims (but without company/government agency names) is available here.
Data leaked from each victim varied, ranging from usernames and password combos to internal network servers info and user IPs.
Additionally, Dookhtegan also leaked data about past APT34 operations, listing the IP addresses and domains where the group had hosted web shells in the past, and other operational data.
Besides data on past operations, the leaker also doxxed Iranian Ministry of Intelligence officers, posting phone numbers, images, and names of officers involved with APT34 operations.
For some officers, Dookhtegan created PDF files containing their names, roles, images, phone numbers, email addresses, and social media profiles.
It was clear from the detailed doxing packages that the leaker had a bone to pick with the Iranian Ministry of Intelligence officers, to which he referred many times as "cruel," "ruthless," and "criminal."
"We have more secret information about the crimes of the Iranian Ministry of Intelligence and its managers and we are determined to continue to expose them," Dookhtegan said in a Telegram message posted last week.
The leaker also posted screenshots on the Telegram channel alluding to destroying the control panels of APT34 hacking tools and wiping servers clean.
The data leaked on this Telegram channel is now under analysis by several cyber-security firms, ZDNet was told.
It has also made its way on other file sharing sites, such as GitHub.
"It's likely this group will alter their toolset in order to maintain operational status," Brandon Levene, Head of Applied Intelligence at Chronicle, told ZDNet today in an email "There may be some copycat activity derived from the leaked tools, but it is unlikely to see widespread use."
This is because the tools aren't sophisticated and aren't top-tier tools like the ones leaked in the Shadow Brokers' NSA leak.
Nation-state or criminal groups who will reuse these tools will most likely do it as a smoke-screen or false flag, to mask their operations as APT34.
Chrome will soon try HTTPS first when you type an incomplete URL
Go malware is now common, having been adopted by both APTs and e-crime groups
Chinese cyberspies targeted Tibetans with a malicious Firefox add-on
This chart shows the connections between cybercrime groups
Please review our terms of service to complete your newsletter subscription.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By joining ZDNet, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

            You agree to receive updates, promotions, and alerts from ZDNet.com.
You may unsubscribe at any time.
By signing up, you agree to receive the selected newsletter(s) which you may unsubscribe from at any time.
You also agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge the data collection and usage practices outlined in our Privacy Policy.

McAfee/FireEye merger completed, CEO says automation only way forward for cybersecurity

									
																			CEO Bryan Palma said the deficit of cybersecurity talent means AI and machine learning will need to take on a bigger role in cybersecurity.

Citizen Lab researcher disputes claims from NSO Group after UK court finds UAE ruler used Pegasus to hack ex-wife, lawyers

									
																			"Would NSO Group have notified Princess Haya's lawyers had I not done my own notification?"
Citizen Lab's William Marczak told ZDNet.

Ransomware: Cyber criminals are still exploiting these old vulnerabilities, so patch now

									
																			Years-old security vulnerabilities remain a common attack method for ransomware attacks because organisations aren't applying the patches to fix them.

Singapore tweaks cybersecurity strategy with OT emphasis

BrewDog exposed data of 200,000 shareholders for over a year

									
																			The beer's on BrewDog, too.

Russia poses the biggest nation-state cyber threat, says Microsoft

									
																			Microsoft's Digital Defense Report points the finger at Russia, North Korea, Iran and China, among others.

Google announces new efforts to protect journalists and high-risk users from cyberattacks

									
																			The announcement comes one day after the Google TAG team alerted journalists and high-risk groups that could be targets to ongoing attacks.

Building cyber radar systems could alert Indo-Pacific nations and their allies

JFTC starts another antitrust probe against Apple and Google on smart devices: Report

									
																			The latest antitrust probe will explore market conditions for smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables.
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY.
Privacy Policy |
                    Cookie Settings |
                    Advertise |
                    Terms of Use
