An official website of the United States government

Official websites use .gov

              A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

              A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website.
Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
The group, which has been operating since at least in or about 2007, targets government, military, security organizations, and other targets of perceived intelligence value.
“The Department of Justice is committed to disrupting, not just watching, national security cyber threats using every tool at our disposal, and today’s effort is another example of our commitment to do that,” said Assistant Attorney General Demers.
“This court-ordered seizure will assist in the identification of victim devices and disrupts the ability of these hackers to steal personal and other sensitive information and carry out disruptive cyber attacks.
“By seizing a domain used by malicious cyber actors in their botnet campaign, the FBI has taken a critical step in minimizing the impact of the malware attack.
While this is an important first step, the FBI's work is not done.
“These hackers are exploiting vulnerabilities and putting every American’s privacy and network security at risk.
The VPNFilter botnet uses several stages of malware.
Although the second stage of malware, which has the malicious capabilities described above, can be cleared from a device by rebooting it, the first stage of malware persists through a reboot, making it difficult to prevent reinfection by the second stage.
In order to identify infected devices and facilitate their remediation, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Western District of Pennsylvania applied for and obtained court orders, authorizing the FBI to seize a domain that is part of the malware’s command-and-control infrastructure.
This will redirect attempts by stage one of the malware to reinfect the device to an FBI-controlled server, which will capture the Internet Protocol (IP) address of infected devices, pursuant to legal process.
A non-profit partner organization, The Shadowserver Foundation, will disseminate the IP addresses to those who can assist with remediating the VPNFilter botnet, including foreign CERTs and internet service providers (ISPs).
Owners of SOHO and NAS devices that may be infected should reboot their devices as soon as possible,  temporarily eliminating the second stage malware and causing the first stage malware on their device to call out for instructions.
The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security have also jointly notified trusted ISPs.
The Department and the FBI also encourage users and administrators to review the Cisco blog post on VPNFilter, available HERE, for recommendations and to ensure that their devices are updated with the latest patches.
The efforts to disrupt the VPNFilter botnet were led by the FBI’s Pittsburgh and Atlanta Offices; FBI Cyber Division;  Trial Attorney Matthew Chang of the National Security Division’s Counterintelligence and Export Control Section; and Assistant U.S.
Attorneys Charles Eberle and Soo C. Song of the Western District Pennsylvania.
Critical assistance was also provided by Richard Green of the Criminal Division’s Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section and The Shadowserver Foundation.
Note: The documents filed by the Government as well as the court orders entered in this case are available as attachments below.
