Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
The Week in Ransomware - October 8th 2021 - Making arrrests
Cox Media Group confirms ransomware attack that took down broadcasts
Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Microsoft revealed last night that it successfully disrupted a hacking campaign associated with the Russian military intelligence service GRU.
The group is known in infosec industry circles as APT28, Fancy Bear, or Strontium, and has been previously linked to cyber-espionage campaigns aimed at numerous governments around the world, including to the hack of the Democratic National Committee ahead of the 2016 US Presidential Election.
Microsoft President Brad Smith said that Microsoft's Digital Crimes Unit (DCU) successfully executed a court order to transfer control of six internet domains created by the group.
The first domain was registered to look like a domain for the International Republican Institute, which promotes democratic principles.
The second was registered to mimic the Hudson Institute, an organization known for its discussions on election cybersecurity.
The last four were blatant attempts at mimicking domains part of the US Senate's IT infrastructure.
Microsoft said it notified all three organizations.
Based on their format, the domains were most likely supposed to be used as part of spear-phishing operations.
Microsoft says it managed to gain ownership of the domains before they were used in any attacks.
The OS maker said this was the twelfth time they used a court order to take control of domains they believed to be associated with APT28's attack infrastructure.
Smith said they have now taken control of 84 APT28 domains in the last two years.
"Despite last week's steps, we are concerned by the continued activity targeting these and other sites and directed toward elected officials, politicians, political groups and think tanks across the political spectrum in the United States," Smith said.
"Taken together, this pattern mirrors the type of activity we saw prior to the 2016 election in the United States and the 2017 election in France."
Last week, Reuters reported that the FBI was investigating cyber-attacks on the congressional campaign of a Democratic candidate in California, albeit there's no evidence that Microsoft's intervention is tied to that investigation.
Speaking at a conference in mid-July, Tom Burt, Corporate Vice President for Customer Security and Trust, Microsoft, said Microsoft had blocked at the time the first cyber-attacks on the US 2018 midterm elections.
In May this year, the FBI also intervened in a similar fashion to take control of domains that the APT28 group was using to control the VPNFilter IoT botnet.
While announcing Microsoft's intervention to take down the six APT28 domains, Smith also announced the launch of the AccountGuard service designed to help US election and campaign entities secure their IT infrastructure against nation-state attacks.
Bleeping Computer first broke the story about Microsoft's new AccountGuard service at the start of the month —more details here.
After Microsoft revealed its takeover of the six APT28 domains, Google also issued a security advisory on its blog about the dangers of government-backed phishing operations.
Last week, Google added support for controlling the behavior of "Government backed attacks" alerts inside the G Suite service.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
New Windows security updates break network printing
U.S. govt to sue contractors who hide breach incidents
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Microsoft fixes bug blocking Azure Virtual Desktops security updates
Everyone blames the Russians for hacking the DNC during the 2016 presidential election.
However, since the DNC never allowed any security agency to inspect their servers, there is no actual PROOF that the Russians had anything to do with the release of the Clinton and Podesta emails, and it is just as likely that the emails were leaked by a person working for the Clinton campaign.
CrowdStrike performed an analysis confirming DNC server infiltration (https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/bears-midst-intrusion-democratic-national-committee/)
Lisa Page testified under oath 3 weeks ago that the whole Russia narrative was completely made up , Russians were never involved in any hacking and claimed her FBI superiors made her cover up the fact that Russia was never involved.
She also testified that her superiors purposely altered top secret documents to make sure they covered their tracks .
Of course the main stream media never reported it and will continue to not report it.
And now the MSM wants to protect us from "Fake News" by trying to suppress independent creators on YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, etc.
They call everyone else "nazis" but they seem to be using the same techniques that the Nazis used to control the media and suppress dissent.
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft shares Windows 11 TPM check bypass for unsupported PCs
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Windows Repair (All In One)
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
