Russian attempts to launch cyber-attacks against US conservative groups have been thwarted, Microsoft says.
The software company said Russian hackers had tried to steal data from political organisations, including the International Republican Institute and the Hudson Institute think tanks.
But they had been thwarted when its security staff had won control of six net domains mimicking their websites.
Microsoft said the Fancy Bear hacking group had been behind the attacks.
"We're concerned that these and other attempts pose security threats to a broadening array of groups connected with both American political parties in the run-up to the 2018 elections," Microsoft said in its blog detailing its work.
The thwarted attack was likely the start of a "spear phishing" campaign, said Microsoft.
This would involve tricking people into visiting the mimicked domains allowing the Fancy Bear group to see and steal login information that people use.
As well as the two think-tanks, the domains seized were associated with several Senate offices and services.
One domain sought to mimic Microsoft's Office 365 online service.
Russia has denied Microsoft's allegations that it targeted the right-wing think-tanks.
President Vladimir Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Moscow was "unaware" of any attempted interference by Russia-linked hackers in the US mid-term elections.
"[Our] reaction is traditional," he told the Interfax news agency.
"We are unaware what kind of hackers they refer to, we do not know what this interference entails."
BBC Monitoring reported him as adding: "We do not understand whom exactly it concerns, what the evidence is and what such conclusions are based on.
We have no such information."
He said: "We hear confirmation from America that there was no meddling in the election."
The New York Times suggested that the two think tanks were targeted because they were former supporters of President Trump but were now foes who had called for more sanctions to be imposed on Russia.
The International Republican Institute's directors include Senator John McCain and General HR McMaster who was replaced earlier this year as the White House national security adviser.
IRI president Daniel Twining told the Times that the attacks were consistent with the "campaign of meddling" the Kremlin is known to have indulged in.
In its blog, Microsoft president Brad Smith said it had grabbed dodgy domains 12 times in two years to shut down 84 websites associated with Fancy Bear.
It said that, so far, it had no evidence that the domains had been used in any attacks.
The domains could have been set up to help a future planned assault.
Microsoft added that the attack activity seen around the domains "mirrors" what it saw in 2016 in the US and during the 2017 election in France.
Microsoft's action comes soon after the US charged 12 Russian intelligence officers with hacking computer networks used by Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party.
Hunt wants 'malign' Russia to face action
Trump relaxes rules around cyber-attacks
Russian hackers' UK link revealed
US accuses Russia of 'pervasive' meddling
Nations agree to 15% minimum corporate tax rate
The historic deal is designed to make big corporations pay a fairer share of tax around the world.
Suicide attack on Afghan mosque kills at least 50
Facebook apologises as services hit again
Kristen Stewart: Playing Diana made me really nervous
Poland stokes fears of leaving EU in 'Polexit'
On patrol with a real-life Robocop.
VideoOn patrol with a real-life Robocop
South Korean drama exposes military's dark side
Air India: The iconic maharajah returns home
The women breaking tradition to write novels
Physics suggests that the future has already happened
The science of social media addiction.
VideoThe science of social media addiction
Quiz of the week: How's your Korean?
15 sayings from around the world
Nations agree to 15% minimum corporate tax rate1
Parents convicted in first college cheating trial2
Poland stokes fears of leaving EU in 'Polexit'3
Trump must give documents to Capitol riot probe4
Facebook apologises as services hit again5
Trump’s DC hotel lost $70m during his presidency6
US man who faked own death sentenced in Covid scam7
Tiananmen Pillar of Shame statue must go - university8
Berlin police probe Havana syndrome at US embassy9
Suicide attack on Afghan mosque kills at least 5010
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.
Read about our approach to external linking.
