In this entry we share Pawn Storm's recent activities, focusing on their use of some simple methods that typically won't get associated with APT groups.
By: Feike Hacquebord, Lord Alfred Remorin
		
			December 17, 2020
Read time:  ( words)
A defender who finds a simple remote access trojan (RAT) in the network won’t immediately think it was from an advanced persistent threat (APT) actor.
Likewise, brute force attacks on internet-facing services like email, Microsoft Autodiscover, SMB, LDAP, and SQL are so common that they may seem like background noise that can be ignored.
But in 2020, the notorious APT actor Pawn Storm used exactly these non-sophisticated attack methods to such an extent that their attacks may get lost in the noise.
In 2020 Pawn Storm spread simple Google Drive and IMAP Remote Access Trojans (RATs) to attack their usual targets, such as ministries of foreign affairs, embassies, the defense industry and the military.
The RATs were also sent to a wider net of targets including various industries around the world.
The group also performed widespread brute force attacks to steal credentials such as those of corporate email accounts, as evidenced by network probes we attribute to Pawn Storm and the loose way the actor abused compromised email accounts in malware and in sending spear-phishing emails.
Pawn Storm even hardcoded compromised military and government-related email addresses in their IMAP RAT malware to communicate with victims’ computers.
Recently, Norwegian authorities announced that Pawn Storm hacked the Norwegian parliament through brute force attacks.
As shown in incremental improvements, subsequent versions of the malware hint towards a learning curve of the malware author that is more typical for an inexperienced actor than for an advanced actor.
First, the RATs were so simple that they did not even take into account international keyboards.
This means it would be difficult for the attacker to enumerate the victims’ hard drives with files and folders that contain international characters.
This mistake was corrected swiftly, but it shows the relative inexperience of this particular Pawn Storm operator.
Later versions of the RAT malware started to use encryption, which could have been added right from the start.
The only secondary payload we observed was a simple keylogger that stores stolen information locally on the victims’ machines.
Attribution to Pawn Storm of these malware samples would be difficult with only the samples at hand.
Typically, a network defender would not attribute this kind of malware to an APT actor at all.
However, we have solid attribution for these samples based on our long-term monitoring of Pawn Storm’s activities.
Recap of recent Pawn Storm activities
Compromising accounts of users from the Middle East
Trend Micro has been closely and consistently monitoring the activities of Pawn Storm, and in March 2020, we released our latest research on the group.
In the aforementioned research paper, we shared that Pawn Storm heavily abuses compromised accounts — mainly in the Middle East — to send spear-phishing emails.
The abuse of compromised email accounts in the Middle East continued in 2020.
For example, in early December 2020 the group used a VPN service to connect to a compromised cloud server, then used the cloud server to connect to a commercial business email service provider.
The group then logged in to a compromised email account of a chicken farm in Oman, and then sent out credential phishing spam messages to high-profile targets around the world.
This shows that Pawn Storm is careful at obfuscating their tracks on multiple levels.
The abuse of various compromised email accounts in the Middle East started in May 2019 and continues today.
Since August 2020, they didn’t use these email addresses to only send spear-phishing emails, but also as a way to communicate with compromised systems in IMAP RATs.
We think that Pawn Storm compromises lots of email accounts through brute force attacks on internet-facing services like email, LDAP, Microsoft Autodiscover, SMB, and SQL.
For example, in May 2020, Pawn Storm scanned IP addresses worldwide, including IP addresses from the defense industry in Europe, on TCP port 445 and 1433, likely in an attempt to find vulnerable SMB and SQL servers or brute force credentials.
In August 2020, Pawn Storm also sent UDP probes to LDAP servers around the world from one of their dedicated IP addresses.
In 2020, Pawn Storm often tries to obfuscate these brute force attempts by routing their attack traffic over Tor and VPN servers.
Yet this is not always enough to hide these activities.
In a Microsoft article about brute-forcing Office365 credentials over Tor, Microsoft attributed the activities to Strontium, which is another name for Pawn Storm.
We wrote about related attacks in early 2020.
To illustrate the simplicity of the malware in Pawn Storm’s recent spear-phishing attacks, we describe one example below:
Technical analysis of Google Drive RAT
Starting from August 2020, Pawn Storm has sent several spear phishing emails with a malicious RAR attachment.
Among the earliest samples we received were two almost identical RAR files that contained a file called info.exe.
Both versions of the info.exe files are self-extracting archives (SFX) that extract and execute two files: decrypt.exe and gdrive.exe.
We noticed that the file decrypt.exe is a decoy file that will run once info.exe is executed.
The application will only show a message box wherein a user can type a password for decryption.
Checking the disassembly of this file reveals that it only shows another message box when a password is entered on the main application.
After closing this application, the file gdrive.exe will be executed by the SFX archive.
The different versions of gdrive.exe are almost identical, with a minor addition to the file 2060f1e108f5feb5790320c38931e3dc6c7224edf925bf6f1840351578bbf9cc of base64 encoding on the victim’s id.
The first thing this malware does is it copies itself to the startup directory for persistence.
It does this via cmd.exe with the following command:
Every time the malware runs a command using cmd.exe, the standard output (STDOUT) of the executed command is piped and written to a Google Drive account with the following filename format:
The client key and token used to read and write the attacker’s Google Drive account is hardcoded on the malware itself.
Sending back the information through Google Drive will allow the attacker to check if the machine that executed the malware was the intended victim they wanted to target.
Every 20 minutes, the bot checks for a file in Google Drive.
If a file with a corresponding filename format exist (cmd_{victim’s id}), it downloads that file and runs the contents as a batch file.
Again, the STDOUT of the commands will be written back to Google Drive as a result.
This works as a reverse shell back to the attacker with Google Drive as the Command and Control (C&C) server.
The command file that the bot received from Google Drive will also be deleted once it is downloaded.
Using the “reverse shell” method mentioned above, the attacker can exfiltrate data/documents using the following commands:
The secondary payload with the filename Google Drivemonitor.exe (0b94e123f6586967819fa247cdd58779b1120ef93fa1ea1de70dffc898054a09) is a keylogger.
The collected keystrokes are stored in the same directory from which the malware was executed.
This secondary payload does not have any function to upload the collected keystrokes back to the attacker.
However, since the main malware acts as a “reverse shell,” the attacker can retrieve the collected keystrokes at a later time.
Eventually, the threat actor added improvements to the malware, like encryption.
Later the actor started to use IMAP RATs as well.
Trend Micro recommends Trend MicroTM XDR for extensive monitoring across the connected layers of email, endpoints, cloud workloads, and networks.
Powered by advanced AI and expert security analytics for correlating data, XDR allows earlier detection and response and lessens alert fatigue for IT security teams.
We also offer Trend Micro Managed XDR, a 24/7 service that harnesses the skills of our expert Managed Detection and Response analysts for expert threat monitoring, correlation, and analysis.
Connects to email servers of compromised accounts.
IP address possibly compromised by Pawn Storm.
October 29, 2020 – December 8, 2020
Connects to email servers of compromised accounts.
IP address possibly compromised by Pawn Storm.
October 15, 2020 – December 14, 2020
Scans TCP port 445 and 1433
May 21 – May 26, 2020
Trend Micro Machine Learning Detection
