Over the last 10 months, Kaspersky Lab  researchers have analyzed a massive cyber-espionage operation which we call  “Epic Turla”.
The attackers behind Epic Turla have infected several hundred  computers in more than 45 countries, including government institutions,  embassies, military, education, research and pharmaceutical companies.
The attacks are known to have used at least  two zero-day exploits:
We also observed exploits against older  (patched) vulnerabilities, social engineering techniques and watering hole  strategies in these attacks.
The primary backdoor used in the Epic attacks is  also known as “WorldCupSec”, “TadjMakhal”, “Wipbot” or “Tavdig”.
When G-Data published on Turla/Uroburos  back in February,  several questions remained unanswered.
One big unknown was the infection vector for Turla (aka Snake or  Uroburos).
Our analysis indicates that victims are infected via a sophisticated  multi-stage attack, which begins with the Epic Turla.
In time, as the attackers  gain confidence, this is upgraded to more sophisticated backdoors, such as the  Carbon/Cobra system.
Sometimes, both backdoors are run in tandem, and used to  “rescue” each other if communications are lost with one of the backdoors.
Once the attackers obtain the necessary  credentials without the victim noticing, they deploy the rootkit and other  extreme persistence mechanisms.
The attacks are still ongoing as of July  2014, actively targeting users in Europe and the Middle East.
Note: A full analysis of the Epic attacks is available  to the Kaspersky Intelligent Services subscribers.
The attacks in this campaign fall into  several different categories depending on the vector used in the initial compromise:
The attackers use both direct spearphishing  and watering hole attacks to infect their victims.
Watering holes (waterholes)  are websites of interest to the victims that have been compromised by the  attackers and injected to serve malicious code.
So far we haven’t been able to locate any  e-mail used against the victims, only the attachments.
The PDF attachments do  not show any “lure” to the victim when opened, however, the SCR packages  sometime show a clean PDF upon successful installation.
Some of known attachment names used in the  spearphishing attacks are:
In some cases, these filenames can provide  clues about the type of victims the attackers are targeting.
Currently, the Epic attackers run a vast  network of watering holes that target visitors with surgical precision.
Some of the injected websites include:

The  website of the City Hall of Pinor, Spain

A  site promoting entrepreneurship in the border area of Romania

Palestinian  Authority Ministry of Foreign Affairs
In total, we observed more than 100  injected websites.
Currently, the largest number of injected sites is in  Romania.
Here’s a statistic on the injected  websites:
The distribution is obviously not random,  and it reflects some of the interests of the attackers.
For instance, in  Romania many of the infected sites are in the Mures region, while many of the  Spanish infected sites belong to local governments (City Hall).
Most of the infected sites use the TYPO3  CMS (see: https://typo3.org/),  which could indicate the attackers are abusing a specific vulnerability in this  publishing platform.
Injected websites load a remote JavaScript  into the victim’s browser:
The script “sitenavigatoin.js” is a  Pinlady-style browser and plugin detection script, which in turn, redirects to a  PHP script sometimes called main.php or wreq.php.
Sometimes, the attackers  register the .JPG extension with the PHP handler on the server, using “JPG”  files to run PHP scripts:
The main exploitation script “wreq.php”,  “main.php” or “main.jpg” performs a numbers of tasks.
We have located several  versions of this script which attempt various exploitation mechanisms.
One version of this script attempts to  exploit Internet Explorer versions 6, 7 and 8:
Unfortunately, the Internet Explorer  exploits have not yet been retrieved.
Another more recent version attempts to  exploit Oracle Sun Java and Adobe Flash Player:

Java  and Flash Player exploitation scripts
Although the Flash Player exploits couldn’t  be retrieved, we did manage to obtain the Java exploits:
The Java files exploit a popular  vulnerability, CVE-2012-1723,  in various configurations.
The payload dropped by these Java exploits  is the following:
The Java exploit use a special loader that  attempts to inject the final Epic backdoor payload into explorer.exe.
The  backdoor extracted from the Java exploits has the following C&C hardcoded  inside:
This C&C is still online at the moment  although it redirects to a currently suspended page at “hxxp://busandcoachdirectory.com[.]au“.
For a full list of C&C  servers, please see the Appendix.
The Epic Turla attackers are extremely  dynamic in using exploits or different methods depending on what is available  at the moment.
Most recently, we observed them using yet another technique  coupled with watering hole attacks.
This  takes advantage of social engineering to trick the user into running a fake  Flash Player (MD5: 030f5fdb78bfc1ce7b459d3cc2cf1877):
In at least one case, they tried to trick  the user into downloading and running a fake Microsoft Security Essentials app  (MD5: 89b0f1a3a667e5cd43f5670e12dba411):
The fake application is signed by a valid  digital certificate from Sysprint AG:
Serial number:  ‎00 c0 a3 9e 33 ec 8b ea 47 72 de 4b dc b7 49 bb 95
Thumbprint: ‎24  21 58 64 f1 28 97 2b 26 22 17 2d ee 62 82 46 07 99 ca 46

Valid  signature from Sysprint AG on Epic dropper
This file was distributed from the Ministry  of Foreign Affairs of Tajikistan’s website, at “hxxp://mfa[.
The file is a .NET application that  contains an encrypted resource.
This drops the malicious file with the MD5 7731d42b043865559258464fe1c98513.
This is an Epic backdoor which connects to  the following C&Cs, with a generic internal ID of 1156fd22-3443-4344-c4ffff:
A full list with all the C&C server  URLs that we recovered from the samples can be found in the technical Appendix.
The Epic backdoors are commanded by a huge  network of hacked servers that deliver    command and control functionality.
The huge  network commanded by the Epic Turla attackers serves multiple purposes.
For  instance, the motherships function as both exploitation sites and command and  control panels for the malware.
Here’s how the big picture looks  like:
The first level of command and control  proxies generally talk to a second level of proxies, which in turn, talk to the  “mothership” server.
The mothership server is generally a VPS, which runs the  Control panel software used to interact with the victims.
The attackers operate  the mothership using a network of proxies and VPN servers for anonymity  reasons.
The mothership also work as the exploitation servers used in the  watering hole attacks, delivering Java, IE or fake applications to the victim.
We were able to get a copy of one of the  motherships, which provided some insight into the operation.
It runs a control panel which is password  protected:

Epic mothership control panel login
Once logged into the Control panel, the  attackers can see a general overview of the system including the number of  interesting potential targets:

Epic control panel status overview
A very interesting file on the servers is task.css, where the attackers define  the IP ranges they are interested in.
To change the file, they are using the  “Task editor” from the menu.
Depending on the “tasks”, they will decide whether  to infect the visitors or not.
In this case, we found they targeted two ranges  belonging to:
It should be noted though, the fact that  the attackers were targeting these ranges doesn’t necessarily mean they also  got infected.
Some other unknown IPs were also observed in the targeting  schedules.
There is also an “except.css” file where attackers log the reasons they didn’t try to  exploit certain visitors.
There are three possible values:
These are the “don’t meet the conditions”  reasons observed in the logs:
For this first stage of the attack, the  threat actor uses a custom backdoor.
In some cases, the backdoor is packaged  together with the CVE-2013-5065 EoP exploit and heavily obfuscated.
This makes  the analysis more difficult.
The CVE-2013-5065 exploit allows the  backdoor to achieve administrator privileges on the system and run  unrestricted.
This exploit only works on unpatched Microsoft Windows XP  systems.
Other known detection names for the  backdoor is Trojan.Wipbot (Symantec) or Tavdig.
The main backdoor is about 60KB in size and  implements a C&C protocol on top of normal HTTP requests.
The communication  protocol uses  requests in the C&C replies, which the malware decrypts and processes.
The  replies are sent back to the C&C through the same channel.
The malware behavior is defined by a  configuration block.
The configuration block usually contains two hard-coded  C&C URLs.
He have also seen one case where the configuration block contains  just one URL.
The configuration can also be updated on the fly by the  attackers, via the C&C.
The backdoor attempts to identify the  following processes and, if found, it will terminate itself:
It contains an internal unique ID, which is  used to identify the victim to the C&C.
Most samples, especially old ones,  have the ID 1156fd22-3443-4344-c4ffff.
Once a victim is confirmed as “interesting”, the attackers upload another Epic  backdoor which has a unique ID used to control this specific victim.
During the first C&C call, the backdoor  sends a pack with the victim’s system information.
All further information sent  to the C&C is encrypted with a public key framework, making decryption  impossible.
The commands from the C&C are encrypted in a simpler manner and  can be decrypted if intercepted because the secret key is hardcoded in the  malware.
Through monitoring, we were able to capture  a large amount of commands sent to the victims by the attackers, providing an  unique view into this operation.
Here’s a look at one of the encrypted server  replies:
Once a victim is infected and “checks in”  with the server, the attackers send a template of commands:
Next, the attackers try to move through the  victim’s network using pre-defined or collected passwords:
Listing all .doc files recursively is also  a common “theme”:
In total, we have decoded several hundreds  of these command packages delivered to the victims, providing an unique insight  into the inner workings of the attackers.
In addition to generic searches, some very  specific lookups have been observed as well.
In this case, the attackers were interested  to find e-mails related to “NATO”, “Energy Dialogue within European Union”  and so on.
For some of the C&C servers, the  attackers implemented RSA encryption for the C&C logs, which makes it  impossible to decrypt them.
This scheme was implemented in April 2014.
Once a victim is compromised, the attackers  upload several tools that are used for lateral movement.
One such tool observed in the attacks and  saved as “C:Documents and SettingsAll  usersStart MenuProgramsStartupwinsvclg.exe” is:
This is a keylogger tool that creates %temp%~DFD3O8.tmp.
Note: the filename  can change across victims.
On one Central Asian government’s Ministry of  Foreign Affairs victim system, the filename used was “adobe32updt.exe“.
In addition to these custom tools, we  observed the usage of standard administration utilities.
For instance, another  tool often uploaded by the attackers to the victim’s machine is “winrs.exe”:
This is an UPX packed binary, which  contains the genuine “dnsquery.exe” tool from Microsoft, unpacked MD5:  c0c03b71684eb0545ef9182f5f9928ca.
In several cases, an interesting update has  been observed —  a malware from a  different, yet related family.
This backdoor is more sophisticated and  belongs to the next level of cyber-espionage tools called the “Carbon system”  or Cobra by the Turla attackers.
Several plugins for the “Carbon system” are  known to exist.
Note: the command and control servers www.losguayaberos[.
]com have been  sinkholed by Kaspersky Lab.
Other packages delivered to the victims  include:
These top level packages deploy both  updated Epic backdoors and Turla Carbon system backdoors to confirmed victims,  effectively linking the Epic and Turla Carbon operations together.
The Turla Carbon dropper from these  packages has the following properties:
This is called internally by the authors  “Carbon System”, part of the “Cobra” project, as it can be seen from the debug  path inside:
This acts as a dropper for the following  modules, both 32 and 64 bit:
The Carbon system is in essence an  extensible platform, very similar to other attack platforms such as the Tilded  platform  or the Flame platform.
The plugins for the Carbon system can be easily recognized as they always  feature at least two exports named:

Carbon  system plugin with characteristic exports
Several Epic backdoors appear to have been  designed to work as Carbon system plugins as well – they require a specialized  loader to start in victim systems that do not have the Carbon system deployed.
Some modules have artifacts which indicate  the Carbon system is already at version 3.x, although the exact Carbon system  version is very rarely seen in samples:
The author of the Carbon module above can  be also seen in the code, as “gilg”, which also authored several other Turla  modules.
We are planning to cover the Turla Carbon  system with more details in a future report.
The payload recovered from one of the  mothership servers (at newsforum.servehttp[.
]com/wordpress/wp-includes/css/img/upload.php,  MD5: 4dc22c1695d1f275c3b6e503a1b171f5,  Compiled: Thu Sep 06 14:09:55 2012) contains two modules, a loader/injector and  a backdoor.
Internally, the backdoor is named “Zagruzchik.dll”:
The word “Zagruzchik” means “boot loader”  in Russian.
The Control panel for the Epic motherships  also sets the language to codepage “1251”:
Codepage 1251 is commonly used to render  Cyrillic characters.
There are other indications that the  attackers are not native English language speakers:
The sample e9580b6b13822090db018c320e80865f that was delivered to several Epic  victims as an upgraded backdoor, has the compilation code page language set to  “LANG_RUSSIAN”.
The threat actor behind the “Epic”  operation uses mainly hacked servers to host their proxies.
The hacked servers  are controlled through the use of a PHP webshell.
This shell is password  protected; the password is checked against an MD5 hash:
The MD5 “af3e8be26c63c4dd066935629cf9bac8” has been solved by Kaspersky Lab  as the password “kenpachi”.
In February 2014 we observed the Miniduke threat actor using the same backdoor on their  hacked servers, although using a much stronger password.
Once again, it is also interesting to point  out the usage of Codepage 1251 in the webshell, which is used to render  Cyrillic characters.
There appears to be several links between  Turla and Miniduke, but we will leave that for a future blogpost.
On some of the C&C servers used in the  Epic attacks, we were able to identify detailed victim statistics, which were  saved for debugging purposes by the attackers.
This is the country distribution for the  top 20 affected countries by victim’s IP:
According to the public information  available for the victims’ IPs, targets of “Epic” belong to the following  categories:
When G-Data published their Turla paper,  there were few details publicly available on how victims get infected with this  malware campaign.
Our analysis indicates this is a sophisticated multi-stage  infection; which begins with Epic Turla.
This is used to gain a foothold and  validate the high profile victim.
If the victim is interesting, they get  upgraded to the Turla Carbon system.
Most recently, we observed this attack  against a Kaspersky Lab user on August 5, 2014, indicating the operation  remains fresh and ongoing.
Note:  A full analysis of the Epic attacks is available to the Kaspersky Intelligent  Services customers.
We would like to add the following at the end of the blogpost, right before the detection names:
If you’d like to read more about Turla/Uroburos, here’s a few recommendations:
Kaspersky products’ detection names for all the malware samples described in this post:
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked *
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
Notify me when new comments are added.
“word “Zagruzchik” means “boot loader” in Russian”
” attackers are not native English language speakers”
“File is not exists”  ” Codepage 1251″
Russians only can set language to russian….
And my english it’s not sogood?
Well… If you ask me, your English is rather shaggy.
One doesn’t have to be Russian or Ukrainian or Moldovan to set CP1251.
You tell abaout more than 100 websites being infected.
And say that most of them use TYPO3 CMS.
So I expect You have checked all websites to verify this.
But obviously you have missed something:
You only name some few websites in detail, the first one is the website for City Hall in Pinor.
It uses TYPO3, that’s right.
But it uses TYPO3 version 4.1.
Support for 4.1 was dropped years ago.
Obviously you don’t know that.
So You can’t tell about a specific vulnerability in this publishing platform.
You have mentioned three affected websites.
I was only able to find one online.
And this outdated version could not be used as an example that TYPO3 has a specific vulnerability.
Unto now this version has MANY.
Addionally this also means that there is a PHP version 5.2 or earlier is in use (PHP4).
Seems like the complete server has been set up years ago and is not up to date.
So it also can be a vulnerability in Apache, PHP, TYPO3, FTP and a lot more services and software.
And it didn’t prove the fact it is a TYPO3 vulnerability.
Will I get this also on the more of 100 other sites, too?
The hottest research right in your inbox
While investigating a recent rise of attacks against Exchange servers, we noticed a recurring cluster of activity that appeared in several distinct compromised networks.
With a long-standing operation, high profile victims, advanced toolset and no affinity to a known threat actor, we decided to dub the cluster GhostEmperor.
We discovered a campaign delivering the Tomiris backdoor that shows a number of similarities with the Sunshuttle malware distributed by DarkHalo APT and target overlaps with Kazuar.
This is our latest summary of advanced persistent threat (APT) activity, focusing on significant events that we observed during Q2 2021: attacks against Microsoft Exchange servers, APT29 and APT31 activities, targeting campaigns, etc.
We recently came across unusual APT activity that was detected in high volumes, albeit most likely aimed at a few targets of interest.
Further analysis revealed that the actor, which we dubbed LuminousMoth, shows an affinity to the HoneyMyte group, otherwise known as Mustang Panda.
The hottest research right in your inbox
© 2021 AO Kaspersky Lab.
Registered trademarks and service marks are the property of their respective owners.
The hottest research right in your inbox
