Several sources estimate that by the year 2020 some 50
billion IoT devices will be deployed worldwide.
IoT devices are purposefully
designed to connect to a network and many are simply connected to the internet
with little management or oversight.
Such devices still must be identifiable,
maintained, and monitored by security teams, especially in large complex
enterprises.
Some IoT devices may even communicate basic telemetry back to the
device manufacturer or have means to receive software updates.
In most cases
however, the customers’ IT operation center don’t know they exist on the
network.
In 2016, the Mirai botnet was discovered by the malware
research group MalwareMustDie.
The botnet initially consisted of IP cameras and
basic home routers, two types of IoT devices commonly found in the
household.
As more variants of Mirai
emerged, so did the list IoT devices it was targeting.
The source code for the
malware powering this botnet was eventually leaked online.
In 2018, hundreds of thousands of home and small business
networking and storage devices were compromised and loaded with the so-called
“VPN Filter” malware.
The FBI has publicly attributed this activity to a
nation-state actor and took subsequent actions to disrupt this botnet, although
the devices would remain vulnerable to re-infection unless proper firmware or
security controls were put in place by the user.
There were also multiple press reports of cyber-attacks on
several devices during the opening ceremonies for the 2018 Olympic Games in PyeongChang.
Officials did confirm a few days later that they were a victim of malicious
cyber-attacks that prevented attendees from printing their tickets to the Games
and televisions and internet access in the main press center simply stopped
working.
In April, security researchers in the Microsoft Threat Intelligence
Center discovered infrastructure of a known adversary
communicating to several external devices.
Further research
uncovered attempts by the actor to compromise popular IoT devices (a VOIP
phone, an office printer, and a video decoder) across multiple customer
locations.
The investigation uncovered that an actor had used these devices to
gain initial access to corporate networks.
In two of the cases, the passwords
for the devices were deployed without changing the default manufacturer’s
passwords and in the third instance the latest security update had not been
applied to the device.
These devices became points of ingress from which the actor established
a presence on the network and continued looking for further access.
Once the
actor had successfully established access to the network, a simple network scan
to look for other insecure devices allowed them to discover and move across the
network in search of higher-privileged accounts that would grant access to
higher-value data.
After gaining access to each of the IoT
devices, the actor ran tcpdump to
sniff network traffic on local subnets.
They were also seen enumerating
administrative groups to attempt further exploitation.
As the actor
moved from one device to another, they would drop a simple shell script to
establish persistence on the network which allowed extended access to continue
hunting.
Analysis of network traffic showed the
devices were also communicating with an external command and control (C2)
server.
Figure 1: script used to maintain network persistence
The following IP addresses are believed to have been used by
the actor for command and control (C2) during these intrusions:
We attribute the attacks on these customers using three
popular IoT devices to an activity group that Microsoft refers to as STRONTIUM.
Since we identified these attacks in the early stages, we have not been able to
conclusively determine what STRONTIUM’s ultimate objectives were in these intrusions.
Over the last twelve months, Microsoft has delivered nearly
1400 nation-state notifications to those who have been targeted or compromised
by STRONTIUM.
One in five notifications of STRONTIUM activity were tied to attacks
against non-governmental organizations, think tanks, or politically affiliated
organizations around the world.
The remaining 80% of STRONTIUM attacks have
largely targeted organizations in the following sectors: government, IT, military,
defense, medicine, education, and engineering.
We have also observed and notified
STRONTIUM attacks against Olympic organizing committees, anti-doping agencies,
and the hospitality industry.
The “VPN
Filter” malware has also been attributed to STRONTIUM by the FBI.
Today we are sharing this information to raise awareness of
these risks across the industry and calling for better enterprise integration
of IoT devices, particularly the ability to monitor IoT device telemetry within
enterprise networks.
Today, the number of deployed IoT devices outnumber the
population of personal computers and mobile phones, combined.
With each
networked IoT device having its own separate network stack, it’s quite easy to
see the need for better enterprise management, especially in today’s “bring
your own device” world.
While much of the industry focuses on the threats of hardware
implants, we can see in this example that adversaries are happy to exploit
simpler configuration and security issues to achieve their objectives.
These simple
attacks taking advantage of weak device management are likely to expand as more
IoT devices are deployed in corporate environments.
Upon conclusion of our
investigation, we shared this information with the manufacturers of the
specific devices involved and they have used this event to explore new
protections in their products.
Below are a series of indicators Microsoft has observed as
active during the STRONTIUM activity discussed in this article.
There are additional steps an organization can take to
protect their infrastructure and network from similar activity.
Microsoft recommends
the following actions to better secure and manage risk associated with IoT devices:
This case is one of several examples that Eric Doerr will present at Black Hat, on August 8, 2019, where Microsoft is calling for greater industry transparency  to ensure that defenders are best equipped to respond to threats from well-resourced adversaries.
Microsoft Threat Intelligence Center (MSTIC)
