Manage your personalised Watchlist.Set up an online Virtual Portfolio.Participate in Share Chat.See more trades and director dealings.Play the Fantasy Share Trading Game.
We are delighted to be joined by Greatland Gold (#GGP) Helium One (#HE1) and Open Orphan spin-out Poolbeg Pharma (POLB) on October 19, 6-8 PM – the London South East October Webinar, one of the outstanding IR events of the year.
Fri, 19th Jun 2015 14:24
Berlin (Alliance News) - Prominent Russian hacker group Sofacy is suspected of being behind a six-month-long cyberattack against the German parliament that ended on May 20, an expert familiar with the matter told dpa Friday.
There was "concrete evidence" that the attackers, who used several waves of Trojan viruses to gradually extend their access to the so-called Parlacom network, were members of the Sofacy group, sometimes referred to as APT28.
The group has been operating since 2006 and is funded by the government, the source said.
The news comes after parliamentarians were told to remain on high alert and be sure to follow cybersecurity guidelines in the future, according to an email seen by dpa on Friday.
"Even though data siphoning ended on May 20, the threat is not over," Bundestag director Horst Risse wrote in the email, which also pointed to the fact that parliamentarians should refrain from opening unknown links and files sent by email.
Recipients of the memo were also advised to change their passwords regularly and use encryption software for sensitive documents.
(Adds detail and background, links to Bailey story)LONDON, Oct 9 (Reuters) - Bank of England policymaker
Michael Saunders told households to get ready for "significantly
earlier" interest rate rises as inflation pressure mounts in the
British econ...
Oct 9 (Reuters) - Bank of England's Monetary Policy
Committee member Michael Saunders said households must brace for
"significantly earlier" interest rate rises, The Telegraph
reported on Saturday.
"The only way to sustain higher pay is productivit...
MANCHESTER, England, Oct 9 (Reuters) - Manchester United scored two second-half goals but Manchester City, who had 10 players for most of the match after Georgia Stanway was sent off, grabbed a point in a thrilling 2-2 draw in their Women's Super Lea...
LONDON, Oct 9 (Reuters) - Britain's most energy intensive
manufacturers, including producers of steel, glass, ceramics and
paper, have warned the government that unless something is done
about soaring wholesale gas prices they could be forced to s...
flat rate per trade*plus no annual fees
Datafeed and UK data supplied by NBTrader and Digital Look.
While London South East do their best to maintain the high quality of the information displayed on this site, we cannot be held responsible for any loss due to incorrect information found here.
All information is provided free of charge, 'as-is', and you use it at your own risk.
The contents of all 'Chat' messages should not be construed as advice and represent the opinions of the authors, not those of London South East Limited, or its affiliates.
London South East does not authorise or approve this content, and reserves the right to remove items at its discretion.
