
So, since the program discards traffic such as peer to peer downloads, a person could use that as a means of communication by imbedding messages in files that are sent by that method, as long as the IP addresses of the source and destination were not on the list of addresses of interest.

I thought in years past they did this.
After all you could easily embed encrypted code into a movie, and supply the key in it as well.

Well, they say "high volume P2P" so they are probably looking for some meaningful number of users in the swarm before discarding it.

Wouldn't NSA just tap FA1 at it's USA landing point?
Why would they need to tap it on the UK end?

^^^ Because tapping US citizens on US soil is an altogether different legal problem.
And US constitution protects US persons against tapping by US government(s), not against tapping by UK which is then shared with US.
Most all of the complexity exists to dance around legal requirements.

> Wouldn't NSA just tap FA1 at it's USA landing point?
Why would they need to tap it on the UK end?My first guess for why they'd tap in the UK rather than the US is that US privacy laws may not apply to information collected in the UK.
This would be an obvious way to sidestep US privacy laws.

> My first guess for why they'd tap in the UK rather than the US is that US privacy laws may not apply to information collected in the UK.AFAIK, anything crossing the border can be collected anywhere without legal distinction.
It is the overseas origin or destination that matters, not the point of collection.

Exactly.The "Five Eyes", often abbreviated as "FVEY", refer to an intelligence alliance comprising Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
These countries are bound by the multilateral UKUSA Agreement, a treaty for joint cooperation in signals intelligence.http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_Eyes

FYI As of yesterday google have taken away the front entrance to the skewjack farm facility from the google maps streetview.
It used to show a security Guard at the main entrance.

Exactly, the point of collection determines the level of legal protection on offer for US persons.
That's why the taps are in the UK and not the US.

And what is wrong with intelligence agencies listening in or being able to see your Instagram?
Most of the traffic circumnavigating the internet is total drivel, of no interest to anyone.
Second is undoubtedly porn, we all love it; whether or not we admit it.
GCHQ et al would be remiss if they were NOT doing this.
We live in dangerous times: never has it been easier for violent ideologists to operate covertly and utilise encrypted comms in the planning of atrocities.
Whatsapp is a notable example.
I sincerely hope the whizz kids have developed a key, or the authorities can force Facebook to allow access by the intelligence community to whatsapp.
Civil liberties must unfortunately play second fiddle to security - to disagree is naive and idealistic.

Those who would trade any amount of their liberties, for a greater state of security deserve the shackles and chains of a master.
You could learn from those who have lived under tyranny.
Naive........ Are you describing your state of mind when you were writing your post?

Her the U.S. if ores it's on rules and laws.
