An interesting aspect of studying a particular piece of malware is tracing its evolution and observing how the creators gradually add new monetization or entrenchment techniques.
Also of interest are developmental prototypes that have had limited distribution or not even occurred in the wild.
We recently came across one such sample: a macOS backdoor that we named Calisto.
The malware was uploaded to VirusTotal way back in 2016, most likely the same year it was created.
But for two whole years, until May 2018, Calisto remained off the radar of antivirus solutions, with the first detections on VT appearing only recently.
Malware for macOS is not that common, and this sample was found to contain some suspiciously familiar features.
So we decided to unpick Calisto to see what it is and why its development was stopped (or was it?
).
We have no reliable information about how the backdoor was distributed.
The Calisto installation file is an unsigned DMG image under the guise of Intego’s security solution for Mac.
Interestingly, Calisto’s authors chose the ninth version of the program as a cover which is still relevant.
For illustrative purposes, let’s compare the malware file with the version of Mac Internet Security X9 downloaded from the official site.
It looks fairly convincing.
The user is unlikely to notice the difference, especially if he has not used the app before.
As soon as it starts, the application presents us with a sham license agreement.
The text differs slightly from the Intego’s one — perhaps the cybercriminals took it from an earlier version of the product.
Next, the “antivirus” asks for the user’s login and password, which is completely normal when installing a program able to make changes to the system on macOS.
But after receiving the credentials, the program hangs slightly before reporting that an error has occurred and advising the user to download a new installation package from the official site of the antivirus developer.
The technique is simple, but effective.
The official version of the program will likely be installed with no problems, and the error will soon be forgotten.
Meanwhile, in the background, Calisto will be calmly getting on with its mission.
Calisto’s activity on a computer with SIP (System Integrity Protection) enabled is rather limited.
Announced by Apple back in 2015 alongside the release of OSX El Capitan, SIP is designed to protect critical system files from being modified — even by a user with root permissions.
Calisto was developed in 2016 or earlier, and it seems that its creators simply didn’t take into account the then-new technology.
However, many users still disable SIP for various reasons; we categorically advise against doing so.
Calisto’s activity can be investigated using its child processes log and decompiled code:
Log of commands executed by the Trojan during its operation
Hardcoded commands inside the Calisto sample
