While investigating attacks related to a group named Cycldek post 2018, we were able to uncover various pieces of information on its activities that were not known thus far.
In this blog post we aim to bridge the knowledge gap on this group and provide a more thorough insight into its latest activities and modus operandi.
Here are some key insights that will be described in this publication:
Cycldek (also known as Goblin Panda and Conimes) has been active in the past two years, conducting targeted operations against governments in Southeast Asia.
Our analysis shows two distinct patterns of activity, indicating the group consists of two operational entities that are active under a mutual quartermaster.
We were able to uncover an extensive toolset for lateral movement and information stealing used in targeted networks, consisting of custom and unreported tools as well as living-off-the-land binaries.
One of the newly revealed tools is named USBCulprit and has been found to rely on USB media in order to exfiltrate victim data.
This may suggest Cycldek is trying to reach air-gapped networks in victim environments or relies on physical presence for the same purpose.
Cycldek is a long-known Chinese-speaking threat actor.
Based on the group’s past activity, it has a strong interest in Southeast Asian targets, with a primary focus on large organizations and government institutions in Vietnam.
This is evident from a series of targeted campaigns that are publicly attributed to the group, as outlined below:
2013 – indicators affiliated to the group were found in a network of a technology company operating in several sectors, as briefly described by CrowdStrike.
2014 – further accounts by CrowdStrike describe vast activity by the group against Southeast Asian organizations, most notably Vietnam.
The campaigns made prominent use of Vietnamese-language lure documents, delivering commodity malware like PlugX, that was typically leveraged by Chinese-speaking actors.
2017 – the group was witnessed launching attacks using RTF lure documents with political content related to Vietnam, dropping a variant of a malicious program named NewCore RAT, as described by Fortinet.
2018 – attacks have been witnessed in government organizations across several Southeast Asian countries, namely Vietnam, Thailand and Laos, using a variety of tools and new TTPs.
Those include usage of the Royal Road builder, developed versions of the NewCore RAT malware and other unreported implants.
These were the focus of intel reports available to Kaspersky’s Threat Intelligence Portal subscribers since October 2019, and will be the subject matter of this blog post.
Figure 1: Timeline of Cycldek-attributed attacks.
Most attacks that we observed after 2018 start with a politically themed RTF document built with the 8.t document builder (also known as ‘Royal Road’) and sent as a phishing mail to the victims.
These documents are bundled with 1-day exploits (e.g.
CVE-2012-0158, CVE-2017-11882, CVE-2018-0802) which in turn run a dropper for three files:
a legitimate signed application, usually related to an AV product, e.g.
QcConsol – McAfee’s QuickClean utility, and wsc_proxy.exe, Avast’s remediation service.
a malicious DLL which is side-loaded by the former application.
an encrypted binary which gets decrypted and executed by the DLL.
The final payload that is run in memory is malware known as NewCore RAT.
It is based on an open-source framework named PcShare or PcClient that used to be prevalent in Chinese hacker forums more than a decade ago.
Today, the software is fully available on Github, allowing attackers to leverage and modify it for their needs.
In the case of Cycldek, the first public accounts of the group’s usage of NewCore date back to 2017.
As described in a blog post by Fortinet, the malware provides the attacker with broad capabilities such as conducting a range of operations on files, taking screenshots, controlling the machine via a remote shell and shutting down or restarting the system.
When inspecting the NewCore RAT malware delivered during the various attacks we investigated, we were able to distinguish between two variants.
Both were deployed as side-loaded DLLs and shared multiple similarities, both in code and behavior.
At the same time, we noticed differences that indicate the variants could have been used by different operators.
Our analysis shows that the underlying pieces of malware and the way they were used form two clusters of activity.
As a result, we named the variants BlueCore and RedCore and examined the artifacts we found around each one in order to profile their related clusters.
Notable characteristics of each cluster’s implant are summarized in the table below.
