It’s easy to notice if you’ve fallen victim to an advertising partner program: the system has new apps that you didn’t install, ad pages spontaneously open in the browser, ads appear on sites where they never used to, and so on.
If you notice these symptoms on your computer, and in the list of installed utilities there is, for example, setupsk, Browser Enhancer, Zaxar game browser, “PC optimizers” (such as Smart Application Controller or One System Care), or unknown browsers, 99% of the time it’s pay-per-install network.
Every month, Kaspersky Lab security solutions prevent more than 500,000 attempts to install software that is distributed through advertising partner programs.
Most such attempts (65%) happen in Russia.
Geography of attempts to install advertising partner programs apps, June 2018
The partner program acts as an intermediary between software vendors who wish to distribute their apps and owners of file hosting sites.
When the user clicks the Download or similar button on such sites, the partner program provides a special installer that downloads the required file, but also determines which set of additional software should be installed on the PC.
File partner programs benefit everyone except the user.
The site owner receives money for installing “partner” apps, and the partner program organizer collects a fee from the advertisers, who in turn get what they wanted, since their software is installed.
To illustrate the process, we chose a scheme used by several partner programs.
Let’s look at a real page offering to download a plugin for the S.T.A.L.K.E.R.
game.
On attempting to download it, the user is redirected to a landing page selected by the administrator of the file-sharing site when loading the file onto the partner program server.
Such pages often mimic the interface of popular cloud services:
Example of a fake page to which the user is redirected
This is what the landing page chooser looks like in the File-7 partner program settings
On clicking the download button, the user receives a file with one of the following formats:
ZIP-archive
Torrent file
ISO image
HTML document
Moreover, archives are often multi-layered and, in many cases, password-protected.
Such protective measures and choice of format are not accidental — partner programs engage a wide range of tricks to prevent browser from blocking the download of their installers.
Notification about installer download blocks in a partner program’s news feed
The victim is often guided through the loader installation with hints on the download pages as to how to find the program, which password to use for the archive, and how to run the installer.
Some versions contain readme attachments with a description of the actions required for the installation.
Regardless of the type of file that the user wanted to download, the end product is an executable.
Interestingly, every time one and the same file is downloaded, its hash sum changes, and the name always contains a set of some characters.
Example of how loader files are named
At the preparatory stage, the partner program installer exchanges data with the C&C server.
Every message transmitted uses encryption, usually rather primitive: first it is encoded in Base64, then the result is inverted, and again encoded in Base64.
At stage one, the loader transmits information about the downloaded installer, plus data for identifying the victim to the server.
The message includes confidential information: user name, PC domain name, MAC address, machine SID, hard drive serial number, lists of running processes and installed programs.
Naturally, the data is collected and transmitted without the consent of the device owner.
The server responds with a message containing the following information fields:
adverts list — with the installation conditions for certain partner software
content — contains the name of the file that the user originally intended to download and a link to it
icon — contains a link to an icon that is later downloaded and used when starting the graphical interface of the loader.
