In the world of espionage, a ‘honey trap’ traditionally involves a seductive encounter designed to coax information out of an agent, or to compromise him in his work.
Of course, the life of an ordinary person rarely features such mysteries and dangers.
However, he (and in the vast majority of cases it is men who are the intended targets) should be watchful too.
Numerous scammers, marriage fraudsters and other shadowy characters are out to manipulate the natural human desire to find a partner.
This kind of criminal has long chosen the Internet to set traps on the web pages and through advertising.
They even cast their nets into your email box.
So the virtual “honey trap” is not uncommon on the World Wide Web – and once dazzled by a momentary passion, a user can easily find himself left without money or with a nasty infection on his machine.
Online dating sites have long occupied their niche on the Internet.
There are millions of users registered on major dating resources (match.com, badoo.com mamba.ru, loveplanet.ru) and the popularity of online dating could hardly escape the attention of fraudsters.
Spam emails inviting the reader “to meet a nice young girl” or just “spend a night” have become quite common.
Of course, they are in no way related to the major dating portals.
Responsible sites care about their reputation and regularly check their users, while on the contrary spam emphasizes that registration is not required on the sites being advertised.
By clicking the links in these emails the user runs the risk of infecting his computer with malware which is usually downloaded instead of the promised photos of a beautiful stranger.
Below is an email in Russian containing an advert from an online dating site.
The message offers the chance to make new friends and start serious relationships.
Dates can be arranged, while special apps are offered to chat, flirt and rate photos.
The recipient first needs to register.
From: Лаура Subject: Интим Mamba – сладкие знакомства!
Поиск новых знакомств с целью дружбы и серьезных отношений, а также попутчиков.
Возможность назначать свидания.
Онлайн-игры, приложения для общения и флирта, рейтинг фотографий.
Регистрируйтесь, начинайте знакомиться и получать удовольствие от общения” Кто-то ждем именно Вас прямо сейчас!
Это место, где осуществятся Ваши желания!
{LINK} ***********.5ballov.ru
But the link in this email led to an infected web page:
Phishing attacks are yet another threat.
For example, Russian Internet users have recently started receiving mails inviting them to “adult sites” supposedly connected with the popular Odnoklassniki (classmates) social network.
To access this site, users had to enter their login and password.
All these sites turned out to be phishing – the scammers used them as bait to access Odnoklassniki accounts.
In addition, some of these bogus sites also asked for a phone number, potentially sparking a torrent of mobile spam.
These fake sites not only pose risks associated with phishing or malware – they can also jeopardize the wealth of the unwary user.
One simple scam to loosen the users’ purse-strings is to demand registration or confirmation of age via a text message costing from 0.30 USD to 12 USD.
However, once the money has been spent no access is provided – because there is no content to access.
Usually, these web resources do not last long – in a few weeks or even days the fake welcome pages of online dating sites disappear, or their content is changed to typical spam adverts (Viagra, etc.)
The mobile phone often turns out to be the ally of the “honey trappers”, who sometimes use rather crafty tricks.
For example, Internet forums have started to publish messages from bewildered visitors to a dating site.
They tried to communicate with the authors of the profiles via instant messaging on this website.
However, they gradually realized that, far from flirting with a pretty girl, they were prompting mechanical responses from a robot.
Since each message from the user was sent via a text message – at the user’s expense – the fraudsters quickly racked up profits from each visitor.
Any dating site relies heavily on a large user base – so scammers use all their tricks to lure as many visitors as possible.
Spam is the key tool here.
Generally, unsolicited adverts promoting these web resources are distributed using very basic techniques.
Most junk emails are messages containing two or three sentences and a link to a dating site.
In many cases, the text of the message is generated automatically using templates of typical phrases – clearly visible if you look through several emails in a row.
The format is very simple without any images.
The text is primitive with lots of mistakes.
All the author of the email needs is to lure the unwary recipient to a specific web resource – after that it is a purely technical matter.
Similar emails are spread widely in almost all major languages.
The quality of the texts leaves much to be desired so the spammers bulk up the quantity: the volume of such mass mailings is literally enormous.
The idea is very simple – there will always be a certain number of people who fall for it.
Of course, spammers do not neglect more prosaic ways of making money: the distribution of emails advertising brothels under the guise of saunas, prostitutes’ profiles, etc.
The most creative type of junk mail which has not lost its popularity throughout the years is the so-called “Nigerian” spam.
The more romantic authors of these letters target potential victims registered on dating sites.
The girl, who is allegedly writing the email, usually lives in a distant, war-torn African country.
If the user is registered on the dating site, the girl’s first email lets him understand that she is madly in love with him.
If the email arrives as part of a mass mailing, the girl’s feelings develop in the course of correspondence, becoming clear from the second or third email.
Below is one of the spam emails sent to tens of thousands users in January:
Subject: Hello my dearest Friend in mind with hope you are good healthy?
