Download PDF version
According to KSN data, Kaspersky Lab solutions detected and repelled 228,420,754 malicious attacks from online resources located in 195 countries all over the world.
74,001,808 unique URLs were recognized as malicious by web antivirus components.
Kaspersky Lab’s web antivirus detected 18,610,281 unique malicious objects: scripts, exploits, executable files, etc.
There were 459,970 registered notifications about attempted malware infections that aim to steal money via online access to bank accounts.
Crypto ransomware attacks were blocked on 372,602 computers of unique users.
Kaspersky Lab’s file antivirus detected a total of 174,547,611 unique malicious and potentially unwanted objects.
Kaspersky Lab mobile security products detected:
2,045,323 malicious installation packages;
4,146 mobile banker Trojans;
2,896 mobile ransomware Trojans.
2016 has only just got underway, but the first three months have already seen the same amount of cybersecurity events that just a few years ago would have seemed normal for a whole year.
The main underlying trends remained the same, while there was significant growth in trends related to traditional cybercrime, especially mobile threats and global ransomware epidemics.
Ransomware became the main theme of the quarter after knocking targeted attacks from the top of the most popular threat rating.
Unfortunately, this is a situation that will continue to evolve, and those behind the extortion could well end up being named “problem of the year”.
The BlackEnergy cyberattack on the Ukrainian energy sector was the most high-profile incident.
Although it occurred at the end of last year, a fuller picture of what happened only appeared in the course of the subsequent analysis.
Moreover, attempts by cybercriminals to arrange new attacks continued in 2016.
The attack was unique because of the damage it caused – the hackers managed to disable the power distribution system in Western Ukraine, launch the Wiper program on the targeted systems and carry out a telephone DDoS on the technical support services of the affected companies.
There were numerous publications about the attack, and Kaspersky Lab’s experts revealed several aspects of the activities of the group responsible.
In particular, they published an analysis of the tool used to penetrate the systems – a malicious DOC file.
For those who want to learn more about the attack, we recommend the report prepared by the American SANS Institute and ICS-CERT.
In February, the experts at Kaspersky Lab revealed details about the activities of Poseidon – the first Portuguese-speaking targeted attack group which had set up a
