A host of events took place in the world of IT threats during the first quarter of 2011.
The predictions that we made in our annual Security Bulletin, particularly concerning mobile threats and targeted attacks, began to come true at an alarming rate and the situation continues to hot up.
Below, we analyze the most significant incidents that occurred in the first quarter.
We start with malware for the Android OS uploaded to the Android Market by cybercriminals.
The malicious applications, over fifty of which have been detected, were infected with Trojans and repacked as legitimate programs.
The attackers were after mobile phone data, including IMEI and IMSI numbers.
The Trojans also included a module that could install additional malicious components on devices without users being aware.
This involved gaining full control of the phone by ‘jailbreaking’ it, a process that circumvents protection to provide full access to the file system.
In order to gain root privileges, which provide virtually limitless possibilities for manipulating the system, the malware leveraged Android OS vulnerabilities using popular ‘rage against the cage’ exploits, which were distributed in the same package as the Trojans.
It was lucky for users who had Kaspersky Mobile Security 9 installed on their devices that these exploits were used.
The Trojans were new and had not been included in antivirus databases, while the exploits bundled with them were successfully detected.
Until signatures were created for the Trojans, KMS 9 proactively detected the whole bundle as Exploit.AndroidOS.Lotoor.g and Exploit.AndroidOS.Lotoor.j.
Since adding the Trojans to our antivirus databases, we have detected them as Backdoor.AndroidOS.Rooter.
It should be noted that they are also called DroidDream in other antivirus vendors’ classifications.
This situation gives rise to two questions:
Is it difficult for cybercriminals to get an Android Market Developer account?
Sadly, it is very easy.
All a user has to do to get an account is pay US $25.
Clearly, Google wants to attract as many developers to its operating system as possible.
However, $25 is not nearly enough of a barrier to entry and cybercriminals can afford to create dozens of such accounts.
This could result in an endless loop, with Google shutting down accounts used to distribute malware and cybercriminals creating new ones without any problems.
