According to KSN:
Kaspersky Lab solutions blocked 962,947,023 attacks launched from online resources located in 187 countries across the globe.
351,913,075 unique URLs were recognized as malicious by Web Anti-Virus components.
Attempted infections by malware designed to steal money via online access to bank accounts were logged on the computers of 215,762 users.
Ransomware attacks were registered on the computers of 158,921 unique users.
Our File Anti-Virus logged 192,053,604 unique malicious and potentially unwanted objects.
Kaspersky Lab products for mobile devices detected: 1,744,244 malicious installation packages 61,045 installation packages for mobile banking Trojans 14,119 installation packages for mobile ransomware Trojans.
1,744,244 malicious installation packages
61,045 installation packages for mobile banking Trojans
14,119 installation packages for mobile ransomware Trojans.
In Q2 2018, Kaspersky Lab detected 1,744,244 malicious installation packages, which is 421,666 packages more than in the previous quarter.
Number of detected malicious installation packages, Q2 2017 – Q2 2018
Distribution of newly detected mobile apps by type, Q1 2018
Distribution of newly detected mobile apps by type, Q2 2018
Among all the threats detected in Q2 2018, the lion’s share belonged to potentially unwanted RiskTool apps (55.3%); compared to the previous quarter, their share rose by 6 p.p.
Members of the RiskTool.AndroidOS.SMSreg family contributed most to this indicator.
Second place was taken by Trojan-Dropper threats (13%), whose share fell by 7 p.p.
Most detected files of this type came from the families Trojan-Dropper.AndroidOS.Piom and Trojan-Dropper.AndroidOS.Hqwar.
The share of advertising apps continued to decreased by 8%, accounting for 9% (against 11%) of all detected threats.
A remarkable development during the reporting period was that SMS Trojans doubled their share up to 8.5% in Q2 from 4.5% in Q1.
Note that this malware rating does not include potentially dangerous or unwanted programs such as RiskTool or Adware.
* Unique users attacked by the relevant malware as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus that were attacked.
As before, first place in our TOP 20 went to DangerousObject.Multi.Generic (70.04%), the verdict we use for malware detected using cloud technologies.
In second place was Trojan.AndroidOS.Boogr.gsh (12.17%).
This verdict is given to files recognized as malicious by our system based on machine learning.
Third was Dropper.AndroidOS.Lezok.p (4.41%), followed by a close 0.3 p.p.
margin by Trojan.AndroidOS.Agent.rx (4.11%), which was in the third position in Q1.
Map of attempted infections using mobile malware, Q2 2018
TOP 10 countries by share of users attacked by mobile malware:
* Excluded from the rating are countries with relatively few users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus (under 10,000).
** Unique users attacked in the country as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus in the country.
In Q2 2018, Bangladesh (31.17%) topped the list by share of mobile users attacked.
China (31.07%) came second with a narrow margin.
Third and fourth places were claimed respectively by Iran (30.87%) and Nepal (30.74%).
Russia (8.34%) this quarter was down in 38th spot, behind Taiwan (8.48%) and Singapore (8.46%).
In the reporting period, we detected 61,045 installation packages for mobile banking Trojans, which is 3.2 times more than in Q1 2018.
The largest contribution was made by Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Hqwar.jck – this verdict was given to nearly half of detected new banking Trojans.
Second came Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Agent.dq, accounting for about 5,000 installation packages.
Number of installation packages for mobile banking Trojans detected by Kaspersky Lab, Q2 2017 – Q2 2018
TOP 10 mobile bankers
* Unique users attacked by the relevant malware as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus that were attacked by banking threats.
The most popular mobile banking Trojan in Q2 was Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Agent.dq (17.74%), closely followed by Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Svpeng.aj (13.22%).
These two Trojans use phishing windows to steal information about user’s banking cards and online banking credentials.
Besides, they steal money through abuse of SMS services, including mobile banking.
The popular banking malware Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Svpeng.q (8.56%) took third place in the rating, moving one notch down from its second place in Q2.
Geography of mobile banking threats, Q2 2018
TOP 10 countries by share of users attacked by mobile banking Trojans
* Excluded from the rating are countries with relatively few users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus (under 10,000).
** Unique users attacked by mobile banking Trojans in the country as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus in this country.
Overall, the rating did not see much change from Q1: Russia (0.70%) and USA (0.79%) swapped places, both remaining in TOP 3.
Poland (0.28%) rose from ninth to third place thanks to activation propagation of two Trojans: Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Agent.cw and Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Marcher.w.
The latter was first detected in November 2017 and uses a toolset typical of banking malware: SMS interception, phishing windows and Device Administrator privileges to ensure its persistence in the system.
In Q2 2018, we detected 14,119 installation packages for mobile ransomware Trojans, which is larger by half than in Q1.
Number of installation packages for mobile ransomware Trojans detected by Kaspersky Lab, Q2 2017 – Q2 2018
* Unique users attacked by this malware as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus attacked by ransomware Trojans.
The most popular mobile ransomware is Q2 was Trojan-Ransom.AndroidOS.Zebt.a (26.71%), encountered by more than a quarter of all users who got attacked by this type of malware.
Second came Trojan-Ransom.AndroidOS.Svpeng.ag (19.15%), nudging ahead of once-popular Trojan-Ransom.AndroidOS.Fusob.h (15.48%).
Geography of mobile ransomware Trojans, Q2 2018
TOP 10 countries by share of users attacked by mobile ransomware Trojans
* Excluded from the rating are countries where the number of users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus is relatively small (fewer than 10,000) ** Unique users in the country attacked by mobile ransomware Trojans as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus in the country.
First place in the TOP 10 went to the United States (0.49%); the most active family in this country was Trojan-Ransom.AndroidOS.Svpeng:
* Unique users in USA attacked by this malware as a percentage of all users of Kaspersky Lab’s mobile antivirus in this country who were attacked by ransomware Trojans.
Italy (0.28%) came second among countries whose residents were attacked by mobile ransomware.
In this country, most attacks were the work of Trojan-Ransom.AndroidOS.Zebt.a.
Third place was claimed by Kazakhstan (0.63%), where Trojan-Ransom.AndroidOS.Small.cm was the most popular mobile ransomware.
Judging by the data from our honeypots, brute forcing Telnet passwords is the most popular method of IoT malware self-propagation.
However, recently there has been an increase in the number of attacks against other services, such as control ports.
These ports are assigned services for remote control over routers – this feature is in demand e.g.
with internet service providers.
We have observed attempts to launch attacks on IoT devices via port 8291, which is used by Mikrotik RouterOS control service, and via port 7547 (TR-069), which was used, among other purposes, for managing devices in the Deutsche Telekom network.
In both cases the nature of attacks was much more sophisticated than plain brute force; in particular, they involved exploits.
We are inclined to think that the number of such attacks will only grow in the future on the back of the following two factors:
Brute forcing a Telnet password is a low-efficiency strategy, as there is a strong competition between threat actors.
Each few seconds, there are brute force attempts; once successful, the threat actor blocks such the access to Telnet for all other attackers.
After each restart of the device, the attackers have to re-infect it, thus losing part of the botnet and having to reclaim it in a competitive environment.
On the other hand, the first attacker to exploit a vulnerability will gain access to a large number of device, having spent minimum time.
Distribution of attacked services’ popularity by number of unique attacking devices, Q2 2018
The scheme of attack is as follows: the attackers find a victim device, check if Telnet port is open on it, and launch the password brute forcing routine.
As many manufacturers of IoT devices neglect security (for instance, they reserve service passwords on devices and do not leave a possibility for the user to change them routinely), such attacks become successful and may affect entire lines of devices.
The infected devices start scanning new segments of networks and infect new, similar devices or workstations in them.
Geography of IoT devices infected in Telnet attacks, Q2 2018
* Infected devices in each specific country as a percentage of all IoT devices that attack via Telnet.
In Q2, Brazil (23.38%) took the lead in the number of infected devices and, consequently, in the number of Telnet attacks.
Next came China (17.22%) by a small margin, and third came Japan (8.64%).
In these attacks, the threat actors most often downloaded Backdoor.Linux.Mirai.c (15.97%) to the infected devices.
*Proportion of downloads of each specific malware program to IoT devices in successful Telnet attacks as a percentage of all malware downloads in such attacks
Such attacks are launched similarly to Telnet attacks, the only difference being that they require to bots to have an SSH client installed on them to brute force credentials.
The SSH protocol is cryptographically protected, so brute forcing passwords require large computational resources.
Therefore, self-propagation from IoT devices is inefficient, and full-fledged servers are used to launch attacks.
The success of an SSH attack hinges on the device owner or manufacturers’ faults; in other words, these are again weak passwords or preset passwords assigned by the manufacturer to an entire line of devices.
China took the lead in terms of infected devices attacking via SSH.
Also, China was second in terms of infected devices attacking via Telnet.
Geography of IoT devices infected in SSH attacks, Q2 2018
*The proportion of infected devices in each country as a percentage of all infected IoT devices attacking via SSH
The Trojan DanaBot was detected in May.
It has a modular structure and is capable of loading extra modules with which to intercept traffic, steal passwords and crypto wallets – generally, a standard feature set for this type of a threat.
The Trojan spread via spam messages containing a malicious office document, which subsequently loaded the Trojans’ main body.
DanaBot initially targeted Australian users and financial organizations, however in early April we noticed that it had become active against the financial organizations in Poland.
The banking Trojan BackSwap turned out much more interesting.
A majority of similar threats including Zeus, Cridex and Dyreza intercept the user’s traffic either to inject malicious scripts into the banking pages visited by the victim or to redirect it to phishing sites.
By contrast, BackSwap uses an innovative technique for injecting malicious scripts: using WinAPI, it emulates keystrokes to open the developer console in the browser, and then it uses this console to inject malicious scripts into web pages.
In a later version of BackSwap, malicious scripts are injected via the address bar, using JavaScript protocol URLs.
On March 26, Europol announced the arrest of a leader of the cybercrime gang behind Carbanak and Cobalt Goblin.
This came as a result of a joint operation between Spain’s national police, Europol and FBI, as well as Romanian, Moldovan, Belorussian and Taiwanese authorities and private infosecurity companies.
It was expected that the leader’s arrest would reduce the group’s activity, however recent data show that no appreciable decline has taken place.
In May and June, we detected several waves of targeted phishing against banks and processing companies in Eastern Europe.
The email writers from Carbanak masquerades as support lines of reputable anti-malware vendors, European Central Bank and other organizations.
Such emails contained attached weaponized documents exploiting vulnerabilities CVE-2017-11882 and CVE-2017-8570.
Kaspersky Lab experts detected a case of the ransomware Trojan SynAck using the Process Doppelgänging technique.
Malware writers use this complex technique to make it stealthier and complicate its detection by security solutions.
This was the first case when it was used in a ransomware Trojan.
Another remarkable event was the Purga (aka Globe) cryptoware propagation campaign, during which this cryptoware, alongside with other malware including a banking Trojan, was loaded to computers infected with the Trojan Dimnie.
These statistics are based on detection verdicts of Kaspersky Lab products received from users who consented to provide statistical data.
In Q2 2018, Kaspersky Lab solutions blocked attempts to launch one or more malicious programs designed to steal money from bank accounts on the computers of 215,762 users.
