Are you planning to visit Brazil during the Olympic Games?
Or watch it online?
In this blog post we discuss the threats to visitors aiming to travel to Brazil to watch the games and to those planning to watch it online.
In the first part we’ll talk about phishing attacks, including one against the organizers of the Games; in the second we highlight WiFi security and the results of the wardriving we did on the streets of Rio, visiting the same places as tourists and the athletes.
In the third and final part we touch upon physical security that involves the usage of USB charging spots at airports, the problem of credit card cloning and ATM skimmers that will directly affect visitors to this summer’s Olympic Games in Rio.
It is clear that using the Olympic Games theme is very attractive to the bad guys.
Cybercriminals always use popular sports events as bait for their attacks, as they did it in the 2014 World Cup – an event we monitored very closely due to the impressive amount of attacks registered at the time, mainly in Brazil.
But the forthcoming Olympic Games has been a bit different.
The number of attacks has been low, compared with the World Cup.
There are many reasons to explain it one of which is that the International Olympic Committee (IOC) keeps a very active Security Operations Center (SOC), working and treating the security incidents, reporting phishing and malware campaigns.
As a result, the number of “in-the-wild” attacks targeting users at this time are low.
However, the bad guys have no limit when it comes to creating new attacks.
We were able to track and block several of them, such as the registration of malicious domains, fake giveaways promoted on social networks and, of course, websites selling fake tickets, using all possible ways to trick users.
Most of the attacks start with the registration of a domain that clearly shows its malicious intent.
Since the beginning of the year, we monitored the creation of new domains registered with the name of the city that will held the games.
In fact, we found that the bad guys are constantly registering new creations at the start of every attack.
Our denylist contains more than 230 of these bad domains.
Several of these domains were registered via a free webmail account or use domains as protection to hide the real identity of the owner.
Some of these domains are hibernating, waiting for the right moment to start an attack (especially those promising free streaming).
Others were used to host fake ecommerce sites selling tickets, hosting phishing, malware, or even used to spread fake ticket giveaways.
Another interesting point is that several of these domains are already using the new gTLD approved by ICANN (such as .tech and others).
It’s not only end-users who are targets of phishing attacks.
Brazil tops the list
