Kaspersky Security Bulletin.
Malware Evolution 2010
Kaspersky Security Bulletin.
Statistics, 2010
Spam Evolution 2010 Combating spam and malware distribution in 2010 Malware in email traffic Botnet closures: key facts and dates Spam and law The dynamics of spam development Spam in mail traffic Sources of spam Spam sources by region Spam by category Methods and tricks used in spam emails Malware in mail traffic Phishing Forecasts
Combating spam and malware distribution in 2010 Malware in email traffic Botnet closures: key facts and dates Spam and law
Malware in email traffic
Botnet closures: key facts and dates
Spam and law
The dynamics of spam development Spam in mail traffic Sources of spam Spam sources by region Spam by category
Spam in mail traffic
Sources of spam
Spam sources by region
Spam by category
Methods and tricks used in spam emails
Malware in mail traffic
Phishing
Forecasts
Kaspersky Lab analyses approximately 1.5 million spam messages daily.
The material for analysis includes email flows of different qualities and intensities provided by our clients and partners, as well as spam that has been captured by special ‘traps’.
All spam traffic is classified by an automated system.
Additionally, part of the incoming flow is analyzed manually.
Kaspersky Lab’s unique spam classification system allows the distribution of spam to be studied and quantified according to share and category.
It can be said that 2010 was ‘revolutionary’ in terms of the campaign against spam, which went on at many different levels throughout the entire year.
For the first time, there were significant achievements made by law enforcement agencies worldwide in their struggle against different types of cybercrime, including spam distribution.
During 2010, the command centers of the Waledac, Pushdo / Cutwail, Lethic and Bredolab botnets were closed down, several high-profile cases against suspected cybercriminals got underway and the SpamIt partner program went out of business.
The events mentioned led to shifts in the distribution of spam in terms of its sources and categories.
For example, the amount of spam originating from the US decreased considerably by the end of the year, while the volume of Eastern European spam grew.
For the first time since we began monitoring the situation, we recorded a continuous decline in the volume of spam in mail traffic.
However, there are two sides to this particular coin, and on the negative side, spam has become much more dangerous.
We have already mentioned the criminalization of spam: small and medium-sized businesses are gradually turning away from this illegal advertising method, leaving it primarily to fraudsters and distributors of fake and illegal products.
In 2010, spam also became a platform for numerous malicious attacks – over the year, the quantity of malicious attachments in mail traffic increased by a factor of almost three.
In 2010, 2.2% of emails contained a malicious attachment compared to 0.85% in 2009.
At the peak of the attacks, which occurred during August, the percentage of emails with malicious attachments was only 6.29% of all mail traffic.
It may well have been these large-scale attacks which drew the attention of the law enforcement agencies to the spam issue.
The most effective of the methods used by the spammers were bulk emails distributing malware.
The messages were convincing imitations of official notifications from popular web resources such as social networks, online stores and banks, etc.
The fraudsters used social engineering techniques to ensnare unwary users: clicking on the links contained in the fake messages redirected users to a site advertising Viagra and at the same time – to a malicious site.
By the end of 2010, the distributors of malicious spam had changed the vector of their attacks towards users from the developing countries.
This may have been the result of an active anti-botnet campaign in the USA and some Western European countries.
The fraudsters began focusing their botnet attacks on users in those countries where law enforcement agencies pay little or no attention to fighting cybercrime.
At the beginning of January 2010, the Lethic botnet was shut down.
Unfortunately, this had only a negligible effect on the quantity of spam in circulation.
The end of February saw the closure of 277 domains belonging to the Waledac botnet.
This was followed by a decrease of 3.1 percentage points in the volume of spam in mail traffic during the first half of March.
However, by the end of May the volume of spam had returned to its usual level.
About 20 Pushdo/Cutwail botnet command centers, estimated by many to be responsible for 10% of the total volume of spam, were closed in August.
This led to a 1.5 percentage point decline in the volume of spam in September when compared to August.
The last and the most severe blow to the spammers’ business was the closure of 143 Bredolab botnet command centers on 25 October.
According to the Dutch police, by the time of its closure this botnet included nearly 30 million computers worldwide.
The botnet was used both for pharmaceutical spam and malware distribution.
Such spam served a dual purpose; advertizing medication, whilst working as a tool for infecting computers, as was described in detail in our Q3, 2010 spam report.
The closure of the Bredolab botnet command centers seriously affected the quantity of spam in mail traffic.
Right after the shutdown it decreased by approximately 8 to 9 percentage points, before reviving once more.
However, October’s level remained low and averaged 77.4%, a decrease of 3.6 percentage points compared with September’s figure.
The decline in the amount of malicious spam in mail traffic, as well as the drastic reduction in the quantity of spam distributed from the USA, down from 15.5% in August to 1.6% in October, were also the result of the successful campaign against Bredolab.
This campaign was a joint effort between the Computer Emergency Readiness Team (CERT), a special task force from the Dutch police, various IT security experts and the providers of the networks where Bredolab servers had been detected.
One of the zombie network owners was arrested the next day at Yerevan International airport.
Those users of zombie computers that could be identified received notifications containing information about the infection and recovery instructions.
In addition to its main ‘activities’, before its closure, Bredolab had also downloaded spam bots such as Rustock (Backdoor.Win32.HareBot) and Pushdo (Backdoor.Win32.NewRest.aq) to victims’ computers.
The Pushdo spam botnet was in its turn used as the main distributor of Backdoor.Win32.Bredolab.
The arrest of the Bredolab owner was not the only example of its kind in the campaign against spammers in 2010.
At the end of September, members of the group which distributed ZeuS, a malicious program most often spread via spam, were arrested.
The arrests were followed by a reduction in the quantity of machines being infected with this malicious program.
In October, law enforcement agencies turned their attentions to partner programs specializing in pharmaceutical spam.
The first day of the month was marked by the closure of Spamlt, one of the world’s largest partner programs offering medication.
At the end of the month, the Moscow authorities initiated criminal proceedings against the General Director of Despmedia, Igor Gusev.
He is charged with selling counterfeit pharmaceuticals, including Viagra, in the USA, Canada and other countries.
The medication was advertized in spam emails distributed via the Glavmed.com partner program, and in some experts’ opinion, Spamlt is part of Glavmed.com.
In Russia, there is no law against spam distribution, nor in fact, is there a legal definition of spam.
So the criminal case against Igor Gusev was initiated under Article 171, Clause 2 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation (illegal business, combined with the generation of income on an especially large scale).
According to data received from the investigating authorities, Glavmed.com’s turnover could have been as high as US $120 million over the last three and a half years.
At the beginning of December, Oleg Nikolaenko was arrested in Los Angeles.
He was charged with spam distribution via the Mega-D botnet command centers which were shut down in November 2009.
Law enforcement agencies received a tip-off about Nikolaenko from Australian Lance Atkinson, one of the co-authors of Affking (a partner program offering fake Rolex watches and counterfeit medications), who was convicted last December.
It is thought that after the Mega-D and Affking closures Nikolaenko continued to spread spam as an active participant in the Spamlt partner program.
He denies any wrongdoing.
Oleg Nikolaenko was due to go on trial on 11 February at the latest.
Encouraged by numerous spam-related arrests and accusations, the State Duma, or lower house of the Russian parliament, together with the Russian Association of Electronic Communications (RAEC) amended the Federal Data Protection Act to provide a definition of spam and make spam distribution a criminal offence.
This was not the first time such an initiative was brought before the State Duma.
As far back as 2004, plans were afoot to amend the relevant law and to introduce criminal liability for sending unsolicited messages.
We hope that this time the matter will be pushed through successfully.
However, neither the implementation dates nor the final result of these initiatives have yet been made public.
According to RAEC’s representatives, the association is not working on any concrete amendment at this time, it is instead developing additions to the code of conduct regarding professional activity on the Internet.
All the aforementioned events – the closure of the botnet command centers, the shutdown of the Spamlt partner program and the initiation of criminal proceedings against the spammers – affected the structure and characteristics of spam in mail traffic: the volume of unsolicited emails has decreased and the list of the most popular spam sources has changed.
Spam in mail traffic
As can be seen from the graph, the volume of spam in mail traffic gradually declined in 2009.
This is especially true for the autumn months, a period when the Pushdo/Cutwail and Bredolab command centers were shut down, the Spamlt partner program ceased to exist and criminal proceedings were initiated against several spammers.
Over the last few years, the amount of spam in mail traffic has not remained at such a low level for such a long period of time.
This is reminiscent of the closure in 2008 of the notorious McColo provider that hosted the command centers of several botnets.
After McColo was closed, the volume of spam in mail traffic remained low for an entire month at around 73.7%.
We can only guess how long the lull will last this time.
However, as practice shows, such low levels of spam are unlikely to prevail into next year.
Virus writers can and will, create new botnets.
Only this time they will surely locate them in countries where the legislation is not so restrictive.
This is indirectly confirmed by the fact that most of November’s spam was directed at Russia, India and Vietnam with 8.6%, 6.8% and 6.5% of the share respectively, while the amount of malicious spam received by users in the USA and western European countries decreased considerably.
The amount of spam detected in mail traffic in 2010 averaged 82.2%.
A low of 70.1% was recorded on 28 October, with a peak of 90.8% on 21 February.
Sources of spam in 2010
In 2010, the largest amount of spam originated from the USA (11.3%), with India [8.3%] and Russia [6.0%] second and third.
As in 2009, Asian and Eastern European countries were widely represented in the Top 20, while the countries of Western Europe remained a minority.
The volumes of spam distributed from the leading countries fluctuated throughout the year, which can be seen quite clearly by the changes in the Top 5 sources of spam.
Changes in the Top 5 sources of spam
The USA remained the No.1 source of spam during the first eight months of the year.
In September, after the closure of the Pushdo/Cutwail and Bredolab botnet command centers, the volume of spam coming from the USA dropped dramatically and in October it distributed less spam than the other Top 5 members put together.
Furthermore, its spam output remained extremely low until the end of the year, at only a few percent instead of the usual 15-20%, and in November and December the USA disappeared from the Top 5 altogether.
October saw the start of fluctuations in the levels of distributed spam which in turn affected the other Top 5 sources.
We can only assume that the spammers were attempting to set up new botnets in countries where they consider the cybercrime legislation to be much less rigorously enforced than in the USA and Western Europe.
Spam sources by region
In 2010, Asian countries proved to be the most prolific distributers of spam.
We highlighted the ‘eastern trend’ with regard to spam distribution last year.
In 2010, more than half of all spam (55.9%) was distributed from Asian and Eastern European countries; including Russia.
Generally speaking however, the situation regarding spam distribution differed very little in 2010 from that of the year before.
Let’s have a look at the spam distribution dynamics by region:
Spam distribution by region in 2010
The most noticeable shifts happened in the fourth quarter of 2010: the amount of spam distributed from the USA decreased sharply, while the quantity of spam sent from Eastern Europe grew rapidly.
As mentioned above, spammers turned to alternative distribution sources after the closure of several botnet command centers.
Overall, the volume of spam originating from Western European nations remained stable, however, each nation’s output varied considerably, with increases for some countries and decreases for others.
Spam distributed from Western European countries
Contrary to the situation in Western Europe, some other countries’ spam distribution figures almost correlate:
Correlation between the spam distribution of countries from the same region
This suggests that different countries distribute the same bulk emails, indicating that infected computers in these countries may be part of the same botnets.
Spam by category in 2010
In 2010, the leading Russian-language spam category, Education, and the leading English-language spam category, Medication and Health-Related Goods and Services were neck-and-neck in the rating: with Education only 0.2 percentage points ahead of its rival.
The share of spam in the Spammer Services (-6.1 percentage points) and Adult content categories (-4.6 percentage points) decreased considerably compared to 2009, while the amount of emails attempting to defraud users in one way or another nearly doubled (+3.8 percentage points).
The year 2010 saw the Top 10 leading spam categories become the Top 11, having been joined by a newcomer – Films on DVD.
These were mostly Russian-language emails which contained advertisements for films and cartoons on DVD, as well as educational programs on DVD.
Such messages were not entirely new – users had received similar spam before, but in 2010 the volume became so large that it warranted a separate category.
It should be stressed that what we are talking about here are pirate copies distributed via partner programs and are entirely counterfeit.
The structure of the different spam categories changed several times throughout the year.
August saw a dramatic growth and subsequent climb in position for the Medication and Health-Related Goods category.
Its share being quite noticeable in September and October’s mail traffic – just prior to the closure of Spamlt which specialized in the distribution of pharmaceutical spam.
No doubt some spammers were aware of the impending closure and were trying to make a last few bucks before the door slammed shut.
The Medication and Health-Related Goods category in 2010
In September, spammers who used to make money offering medication began looking at various other partner programs.
This resulted in the short-term growth of different types of spam, including advertisements for online casinos and porn sites.
The closure of the botnets and such an influential partner program could not help but have an effect on the Partner-to-Ordered spam ratio.
For example, in August the share of partner spam increased considerably, while in September, it started to decline.
a href=”https://media.kasperskycontenthub.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/43/2011/02/08124607/Partner-and-Ordered-spam-in-2010.png”>
