Download the PDF
The Internet has changed forever how people shop.
By 2018, around one in five of the world’s population will shop online; with ever more people doing so on a mobile device rather than a computer.
In fact, it is estimated that by the end of 2017, 60% of e-commerce will come from smartphones.
That’s millions of people enthusiastically browsing and buying while at home, at work, in restaurants, airports, and railway stations, walking down the street, standing in stores, and on holiday, often outside the protective reach of a secure, private wireless network.
Regardless of the device used, every interaction and transaction will generate a cloud of data that brands will want to capture in order to deliver ever more targeted and personalized offers.
Unfortunately, others are waiting to seize consumers’ information too – through insecure public Wi-Fi networks, phishing emails and infected websites, among others.
They are the cybercriminals, and they don’t have a consumer’s or even a brand’s best interests at heart.
The risks facing retailers and online shoppers peak during the busiest shopping days of the year: the late November Thanksgiving weekend that runs from Black Friday through to Cyber Monday, and all through December to Christmas and the New Year.
As the number and speed of transactions increase, so do the cyberthreats.
In this overview, Kaspersky Lab reveals the reality in terms of the top cyber-attacks targeting consumers and retailers during this remarkable buying period.
To put this data in context, it is worth looking back over the last few years to see how the landscape has evolved, focusing in particular on Black Friday and Cyber Monday.
In 2013, the concepts of Black Friday and Cyber Monday were already well established in North America and starting to gain momentum elsewhere.
In the US alone, Cyber Monday saw online sales grow by 21% on 2012, raking in sales of $2.27 billion.
Black Friday achieved $1.93 billion worth of transactions, but won out on average sales value.
17% of total sales were undertaken on mobile – a 55% increase on 2012.
