In February 2016, the Internet was shaken by an epidemic caused by the new ransomware Trojan Locky (detected by Kaspersky Lab products as Trojan-Ransom.Win32.Locky).
The Trojan has been actively propagating up to the present day.
Kaspersky Lab products have reported attempts to infect users with the Trojan in 114 countries around the world.
Analysis of the samples has shown that this Trojan is a brand new ransomware threat, written from scratch.
So, what is Locky, and how can we protect against it?
In order to spread the Trojan, cybercriminals sent out mass mailings with malicious loaders attached to spam messages.
Initially, the malicious spam messages contained an attached DOC file with a macro that downloaded the Locky Trojan from a remote server and executed it.
An early-stage spam message with a malicious document attached
A fragment of the malicious macro
Kaspersky Lab products detect files with malicious macros as Trojan-Downloader.MSWord.Agent and HEUR:Trojan-Downloader.Script.Generic.
We should note that in modern versions of Microsoft Office, automatic execution of macros is disabled for security reasons.
However, practice shows that users often enable macros manually, even in documents from unknown sources, which may lead to some damaging consequences.
At the time of writing, the malicious spam is still being sent, but instead of the DOC files being attached there are now ZIP archives containing one or more obfuscated scripts in JavaScript.
The messages are mostly in English, though some bilingual variants have appeared.
Spam message in English with the archive attached
Message in German and English with the archive attached
The user is prompted to manually launch the scripts.
Contents of the archive attached to the message
Fragment of the archived script
When launched, the script downloads the Locky Trojan from a remote server and launches it.
Kaspersky Lab products detect these script loaders as Trojan-Downloader.JS.Agent and HEUR:Trojan-Downloader.Script.Generic.
Kaspersky Security Network has reported Locky attacks in 114 countries.
TOP 10 countries
We should note that these statistics only include cases where the actual Trojan was detected, and does not include early-stage detections reported as malicious spam or malicious downloaders.
The geography of Trojan-Ransom.Win32.Locky attacks (number of attacked users)
As we can see, the Trojan carries out attacks in practically all regions of the world.
We can assume which countries the cybercriminals see as their main targets based on the list of languages used on the ransom payment webpage (see details below).
The Locky Trojan is an executable file, about 100 kb in size.
It is written in C++ using STL, and is compiled in Microsoft Visual Studio.
When launching, it copies itself to %TEMP%\svchost.exe and deletes the NTFS data stream Zone.Identifier from its copy – this is done to ensure that when the file is launched, Windows does not display a notification saying that the file has been downloaded from the Internet and may be potentially dangerous.
The Trojan then launches from %TEMP%.
Once launched, the Trojan checks for the presence and the contents of the below registry keys.
If data already exists in the registry keys (this is the case if the Trojan has launched before, but its previous session aborted for some reason), Locky reads that data and continues with the infection process.
If launched for the first time, the Trojan performs the following actions:
Contacts C&C and reports infection;
Receives a public RSA-2048 key and infection ID from C&C, saves them in the registry;
Sends information about the language of the infected operating system, receives the cybercriminals’ ransom demand text that will be shown to the victim, saves the text in the registry;
Searches for files with specific extensions on local disk drives, encrypts them;
Deletes shadow copies of files;
Registers itself for autostart (HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run);
Searches for and encrypts files with specific extensions on network drives and on network file resources with no assigned drive letter;
Displays the cybercriminals’ ransom demands to the victim;
Terminates its process and removes itself.
Fragment of code that determines the language of the operating system
The Trojan searches for files matching a given list of extensions.
Then, these files are encrypted as described below.
List of file extensions that are subject to encryption
For each file that matches an extension on the list, the Trojan generates a new 128-bit key and encrypts the file’s contents with the algorithm AES-128 in CTR mode.
The encrypted file is given the name <16 HEX characters as ID><16 random HEX characters>.locky.
Then the following structure is added to the end of the file:
Structure appended by the Trojan to the end of an encrypted file
In C language syntax, this structure may be described as follows:
