One piece of advice that often appears in closed message boards used by Russian cybercriminals is “Don’t work with RU”.
This is a kind of instruction given by more experienced Russian criminals to the younger generation.
It can be interpreted as: “don’t steal money from people in Russia, don’t infect their machines, don’t use compatriots to launder money.”
“Working with RU” is not a great idea where cybercriminals’ safety is concerned: people from other countries are unlikely to report an incident to the Russian police.
In addition, online banking is not very popular in the RU zone – at least, it is much less popular than in the West.
This means that the potential income from operating in the RU zone is lower than in other zones, while the risk is higher.
Hence the rule “Don’t work with RU”.
As always, there are exceptions to the rule.
A rather prominent banker Trojan – Lurk – that is the subject of this paper has been used to steal money from Russian residents for several years.
We have written about this banker Trojan before.
It caught our attention almost as soon as it appeared because it used a fileless spreading mechanism – malicious code was not saved on the hard drive and ran in memory only.
However, until now no detailed description of Lurk had been published.
The Lurk banker Trojan is in a league of its own when it comes to malware designed to steal money from bank customers:
Lurk has existed and actively evolved for over five years, but it works selectively – only on those computers where it can steal money.
In the more than five years that it has been active, about 60,000 bots have been registered in the C&C, which is not a huge number.
Lurk is a versatile banker Trojan – it can steal money not only from the iBank 2 system that is used by many Russian banks but also from the unique online banking systems of some large Russian banks.
Lurk actively resists detection: its developers work hard to minimize detections of their Trojan, while targeted attacks make it difficult to get new samples quickly.
Based on the methods of internal organization used in the malware, its feature set and the frequency with which it is modified, it can be concluded that a team of professional developers and testers is working on the project.
This is not to say that the Trojan is particularly well written: we have seen and analyzed banker Trojans with much higher code quality.
Moreover, our analysis of Lurk has shown that several programmers with different levels of qualification have worked on the code.
The developers clearly made some bad choices in places, which have remained unfixed for years (needless to say, we are not going to alert the developers to their mistakes).
It is worth noting that the malware writers are developing their product: we see that the quality of code has improved over time and the solutions chosen by the developers have generally improved.
What sets Lurk apart is that it is highly targeted – the authors do their best to ensure that as many victims of interest to them as possible get infected without catching the attention of analysts or researchers.
The incidents known to us make us believe that Lurk is successful at what it was designed for: we regularly receive reports of thefts from online banking systems and forensic investigations after the incidents reveal traces of Lurk on the affected machines.
The cybercriminals are interested in the following types of organizations:
IT organizations working in telecommunications field;
mass media and news aggregators;
banks and financial organizations.
Compromised computers of IT and telecoms companies provide the cybercriminals behind Lurk with new transfer servers through which traffic goes to the attackers’ servers.
Media and news aggregator sites, particularly those visited by accountants, are used to infect a large number of users from Lurk’s ‘target audience’.
Banks and financial organizations are of interest to the cybercriminals in connection with their main goal – stealing money.
We won’t comment on the reasons behind the malware authors’ attempts to get a foothold on the machines inside security agencies (these organizations are also among those targeted by Lurk).
The Trojan’s targets appear to include Russia’s four largest banks.
The well-known technique of drive-by downloads is used to distribute the Lurk banker Trojan.
In addition, the cybercriminals distribute the Trojan via compromised websites with legitimate software and across corporate networks – using the psexec utility.
Lurk is distributed primarily using the infamous Angler exploit pack (cybercriminals call it XXX).
With this method of distribution, users don’t have to do anything in particular for their computers to become infected.
Angler is rightfully considered the flagship of exploit packs: exploits for new vulnerabilities are nearly always first implemented in Angler and only later make their way into other exploit packs (or perhaps are just borrowed’).
Exploits for zero-day vulnerabilities are also often implemented in Angler, making the exploit pack particularly dangerous.
Preparation for infecting new victims with Lurk is usually performed as follows:
A website that is of interest to the target audience is selected.
This can be a message board for accountants, a news portal, etc.
The website is infected by stealthily placing a link on it that leads to the exploit pack’s landing page.
If it proves impossible to infect the site, a malicious link is placed into the materials of some ‘affiliate program’ that are shown on the site.
A website that is of interest to the target audience is selected.
This can be a message board for accountants, a news portal, etc.
The website is infected by stealthily placing a link on it that leads to the exploit pack’s landing page.
If it proves impossible to infect the site, a malicious link is placed into the materials of some ‘affiliate program’ that are shown on the site.
Users visiting the site are redirected to the exploit pack’s landing page without their knowledge.
Angler attempts to exploit some vulnerability in the software installed on the user’s computer, which should result in the execution of Lurk’s downloader – mini.
Users visiting the site are redirected to the exploit pack’s landing page without their knowledge.
Angler attempts to exploit some vulnerability in the software installed on the user’s computer, which should result in the execution of Lurk’s downloader – mini.
Curiously, the link to the exploit pack’s landing page is either placed for a short time or is regularly placed and removed.
For example, we have seen the message board of a well-known magazine for accountants become infected.
A malicious link appeared on the message board on weekdays for exactly two hours at lunchtime.
Of course, we detected the anomalous activity and notified the owners of the resource.
However, by the time they read our letter the resource was clean again and they could not identify the infection.
At the same time, during the period when the malicious link was shown on the message board, the Lurk owners managed to infect several new user machines.
The second method of infection that the cybercriminals used extensively is the distribution of malicious code via legitimate websites.
Apparently, this distribution method involves providing infected files to users in the RU zone only, while other users get clean files.
The scheme whereby one computer in an organization is initially infected is very popular among cybercriminals.
Even if the infected machine itself is of no interest to the attackers, the computer is on the same network and on the same domain with other computers containing information that the Trojan’s owners want.
In such cases, the psexec utility developed by Mark Russinovich is used to distribute the malware across the network.
A special mini dropper is then used to execute the Trojan’s main module on other computers on the same network.
This method can result in dire consequences for the organization, since the security of a computer containing data of interest to the cybercriminals essentially depends on that of the least protected computer on the network that is under attack.
The Trojan consists of several modules that have reasonably rich capabilities.
The main Lurk modules are:
mini module;
prescanner module;
core module (the bot’s kernel),
core_x64 module (64 bit version of the kernel);
mini_x64 module (64 bit version of the mini module).
In the first stage of an attack involving the Angler exploit pack, a vulnerability found in the user’s software is exploited and the mini module of Lurk banker Trojan is downloaded and executed.
As mentioned above, the user can download the malicious file from a compromised website; another possibility is infection over the local network.
By Lurk standards, mini is a small program (100-400 KB).
Its main function is to download and execute two other main Lurk modules.
The address of the server used by mini is hardcoded in the program’s body.
Modules are downloaded using standard GET requests.
The modules downloaded by mini are encrypted, with different encryption algorithms used.
The prescanner module is encrypted using the simple “xor-next” algorithm.
Other modules are encrypted using the BlowFish algorithm (ECB Mode), the pseudo key for which is hardcoded into mini.
The real key is created from the hardcoded pseudo key using a sequential search for one character (a brute force attack).
To avoid having to download additional modules every time mini is executed, the Trojan saves these modules in a separate encrypted file located in %APPDATA% folder.
The contents of the storage is encrypted with the Blowfish algorithm, using a key that depends on the time the Windows folder was created.
In addition to a plugin’s name and body, the storage file includes a list of checksums of the names of those processes in whose context the plugin is to be executed.
This information is used by mini to determine which process a plugin should be injected into: for web injection modules, this is a browser process; for the ibank module, it is Java.exe, in whose context the online banking system operates.
According to the operating logic of mini, the second stage of the attack is to load the prescanner module.
The module is a dynamically loaded library with only one exported function – Prescan.
The cybercriminals need prescanner to make their attacks as narrowly targeted as possible.
If a machine does not match the specific rules of prescanner and no online banking systems have been found on it, the module reports this to mini and the latter decides not to try to achieve persistence on the machine.
In this way, the Trojan’s developers try to avoid attracting the attention of law enforcement agencies and anti-malware product developers.
The following fact supports this idea: every time a new bot is registered by the C&C, a unique identifier – bot number – is assigned to the bot.
In the more than five years that the banker Trojan has existed, only about 60,000 bots have been registered by the C&C.
Prescanner performs two main tasks:
collecting information about an infected system;
grabbing passwords from FTP clients found on the user’s machine.
After collecting information about the machine and checking whether its rules are observed, prescanner sends a report to its command server.
In the cases that we have seen, the C&C used by prescanner was the same as that used by the mini downloader.
If it is decided that a machine is unsuitable for a Lurk attack based on the analysis performed, mini and prescanner modules terminate and uninstall themselves.
If prescanner has made the decision to ensure persistence on the machine, it reports this to the mini downloader, which in turn downloads and executes the core module – the bot’s main body.
Core is the main module of Lurk.
Its main functions are:
network interaction with the C&C;
executing commands received from the cybercriminals;
logging keypresses (keylogger function) and recording video from the infected system’s screen;
maintaining the encrypted data storage and Lurk settings;
downloading, installing and executing the Trojan’s additional modules.
The core module is a communication channel of sorts between all the other malware modules and the command server.
The C&C servers used for mini and for core are different.
Core does not have a hardcoded command server address.
The address of its command server is calculated using DGA – the Domain Generation Algorithm.
Among other DGA input parameters, the Trojan’s authors use exchange quotation data received from Yahoo Finance.
This means that the data used to generate C&C addresses cannot be known to security experts in advance.
As a result, it is impossible to predict the addresses generated by Lurk.
After successfully establishing a connection, data collected by the malware and the results of executing commands are sent to the command server every five minutes, with requests for new updates and commands.
All communication between the core module and the C&C is encrypted – core and C&C exchange data is in the JSON format.
The function of intercepting data entered on the keyboard is implemented in the core module in the newer versions of Lurk (starting at least from 8.9773).
Keypresses are intercepted only in the context of windows that have specific words/phrases in their names.
The list of these words/phrases is received from the C&C.
Intercepted data is sent to the command server during the next communication session (every 5 minutes).
The main part of Lurk’s storage is located in the system registry, but some additional data belonging to the storage can be saved as a file on the hard drive.
As a rule, files are used to store a large but logically uniform volume of data, such as video captured from the screen or code for web injection.
But in any case, links to these additional files are always present in the main part of the storage, which is located in system registry.
The bot’s additional modules (plugins) are downloaded by the core module to those computers the malicious program deems most suitable.
Those modules that are required on a specific computer to steal money are downloaded to that computer.
The Lurk modules currently known to us are listed in the table below.
