Ask any expert who analyzes malicious code for Windows which system privileges malware works with and wants to acquire and, without a second thought, they’ll tell you: “Administrator rights”.
Are there any studies to back this up?
Unfortunately, I was unable to find any coherent analysis on the subject; however, it is never too late to play Captain Obvious and present the facts for public evaluation.
My goal wasn’t to review the techniques of elevating system privileges; the Internet already has plenty of articles on the subject.
New mechanisms are discovered every year, and each technique deserves its own review.
Here, I wanted to look at the overall picture and talk about the whole range of Windows operating systems in all their diversity dating back to Windows Vista, but without discussing specific versions.
The Windows XP security model differs significantly from the security model of Windows Vista and newer operating systems.
There are two types of user accounts in Windows XP: a standard account and an administrator account.
The vast majority of users worked with administrator rights, despite the fact that they didn’t need the rights for everyday tasks.
These people infected their systems with malicious software that acquired the rights of the current user and, more often than not, they were administrator rights.
As a result, the malicious software did not encounter any serious problems acquiring elevated privileges in a system running Windows XP.
This mechanism was used until the release of the Windows Vista family, where Microsoft introduced a new security model: Windows integrity mechanism.
Integrity Level in Windows 10
Roughly speaking, the two aforementioned user account types are present in the new mechanism; however, the operating system now utilizes the Admin Approval Mode.
Yes, that very same, our “beloved” UAC (User Access Control).
As soon as there is a need for elevated privileges, a UAC dialog pops up and prompts the user for permission to perform a certain action.
The human factor is one of the primary security problems, and that is why placing responsibility on a user who doesn’t know the first thing about computer security is, to say the least, a questionable decision.
Microsoft itself has issued the following statement on the topic: “One important thing to know is that UAC is not a security boundary.
UAC helps people be more secure, but it is not a cure all.
UAC helps most by being the prompt before software is installed.” For those interested in Microsoft’s position on the matter, I recommend reading the following blog posts: User Account Control, User Account Control (UAC) – quick update, Update on UAC.
The new Windows integrity mechanism is the main protection component of the Windows security architecture.
The mechanism restricts access permissions of applications that run under the same user account, but that are less trustworthy.
Put more simply, this mechanism assigns an integrity level to processes as well as other securable objects in Windows.
The integrity level restricts or grants access permissions of one object to another.
