For the last two years we have been monitoring a Russian-language cyberespionage actor that focuses on Central Asian users and diplomatic entities.
We named the actor DustSquad and have provided private intelligence reports to our customers on four of their campaigns involving custom Android and Windows malware.
In this blogpost we cover a malicious program for Windows called Octopus that mostly targets diplomatic entities.
The name was originally coined by ESET in 2017 after the 0ct0pus3.php script used by the actor on their old C2 servers.
We also started monitoring the malware and, using Kaspersky Attribution Engine based on similarity algorithms, discovered that Octopus is related to DustSquad, something we reported in April 2018.
In our telemetry we tracked this campaign back to 2014 in the former Soviet republics of Central Asia (still mostly Russian-speaking), plus Afghanistan.
In the case of Octopus, DustSquad used Delphi as their programming language of choice, which is unusual for such an actor.
Among others exceptions are the Russian-language Zebrocy (Sofacy’s Delphi malware), the Hindi-language DroppingElephant and the Turkish-language StrongPity.
Although we detected Octopus victims that were also infected with Zebrocy/Sofacy, we didn’t find any strong similarities and we don’t consider the two actors to be related.
In April 2018 we discovered a new Octopus sample pretending to be Telegram Messenger with a Russian interface.
We couldn´t find any legitimate software that this malware appears to be impersonating; in fact, we don´t believe it exists.
The Trojan uses third-party Delphi libraries like The Indy Project for JSON-based C2 communications and TurboPower Abbrevia (sourceforge.net/projects/tpabbrevia) for compression.
Malware persistence is basic and achieved via the system registry.
The server side uses commercial hosting in different countries with .php scripts deployed.
Kaspersky Lab products detect the Octopus Trojan as Trojan.Win32.Octopus.gen.
For more information, please contact: intelreports@kaspersky.com.
The attackers used the potential Telegram ban in Kazakhstan to push its dropper as an alternative communication software for the political opposition.
‘Telegram messenger’ establishes network module persistence in the simplest way and starts the module
We can’t confirm how this malware is being distributed, although it clearly uses some form of social engineering.
This actor previously used spear phishing to spread malware.
