Cryptor malware programs currently pose a very real cybersecurity threat to users and companies.
Clearly, organizing effective security requires the use of security solutions that incorporate a broad range of technologies capable of preventing a cryptor program from landing on a potential victim’s computer or reacting quickly to stop an ongoing data encryption process and roll back any malicious changes.
However, what can be done if an infection does occur and important data has been encrypted?
(Infection can occur on nodes that, for whatever reason, were not protected by a security solution, or if the solution was disabled by an administrator.)
In this case, the victim’s only hope is that the attackers made some mistakes when implementing the cryptographic algorithm, or used a weak encryption algorithm.
The cryptor dubbed Polyglot emerged in late August.
According to the information available to us, it is distributed in spam emails that contain a link to a malicious RAR archive.
The archive contains the cryptor’s executable code.
Here are some examples of the links used:
hXXp://bank-info.gq/downloads/reshenie_suda.rar
hXXp://bank-info.gq/downloads/dogovor.rar
When the infected file is launched, nothing appears to happen.
However, the cryptor copies itself under random names to a dozen or so places, writes itself to the autostart folder and to TaskScheduler.
When the installation is complete, file encryption starts.
The user’s files do not appear to change (their names remain the same), but the user is no longer able to open them.
When encryption is complete, the cryptor changes the desktop wallpaper, (interestingly, the wallpaper image is unique to each victim) and displays the ransom message.
The cryptor’s main window
New desktop wallpaper with the “open key” block unique to each victim computer
The user is offered the chance to decrypt several files for free.
The free trial decryption window
After this, the user is told to pay for file decryption in bitcoins.
The cryptor contacts its C&C, which is located on the Tor network, for the ransom sum and the bitcoin address where it should be sent.
C&C communication window
From this moment on, the cryptor allows the user to check the ransom payment status on the C&C.
Ransom payment details
If the ransom is not paid on time, the cryptor notifies the user that it’s no longer possible to decrypt their files, and that it is about to ‘self-delete’.
Last window displayed by Polyglot
Initially, this cryptor caught our attention because it mimics all the features of another widespread cryptor – CTB-Locker (Trojan-Ransom.Win32.Onion).
The graphical interface window, language switch, the sequence of actions for requesting the encryption key, the payment page, the desktop wallpapers – all of them are very similar to those used by CTB-Locker.
The visual design has been copied very closely, while the messages in Polyglot’s windows have been copied word for word.
The main graphical interface windows:
