In Q2 2018, Kaspersky Lab published two blogposts about Roaming Mantis sharing details of this new cybercriminal campaign.
In the beginning, the criminals used DNS hijacking in vulnerable routers to spread malicious Android applications of Roaming Mantis (aka MoqHao and XLoader), spoofing legitimate applications such as Facebook and Chrome.
During our research, it became clear that Roaming Mantis has been rather active and has evolved quickly.
The group’s malware now supports 27 languages, including multiple countries from Asia and beyond, Europe and the Middle East.
In addition, they have started using web crypto-mining for PC, and an Apple phishing page for iOS devices.
You can check previous chapters of this research here:
Roaming Mantis uses DNS hijacking to infect Android smartphones (April 2018)
Roaming Mantis dabbles in mining and phishing multilingually (May 2018)
In addition we would like to thank and credit security researchers from LAC Co. Ltd. for a very insightful article describing how vulnerable routers were compromised by the Roaming Mantis group, which was disclosed in their Japanese blogpost in June 2018.
According to this research, the threat actor logged in to their router using default ID and password, and changed legitimate DNS settings to rogue DNS settings, where the router’s control panel was accessible over the Internet.
The Roaming Mantis group did not stop its activities after publication of our reports.
We have confirmed several new activities and changes to their illegal profit-gaining methods such as web crypto mining for iOS devices, spreading via malicious content delivery system and so on.
This blogpost reveals some details of our new findings related to Roaming Mantis, based on our research.
The criminals previously targeted iOS devices using an Apple phishing site to steal credentials.
However, they changed the HTML source code of the malicious landing page as follows:
Part of HTML source code of the malicious landing page for iOS
The code above shows that they disabled redirection to the fake Apple portal (with a phishing page) and added code with a web mining script (previously used only for the PC platform) to run mining on iOS devices.
If the user visits this landing page from an iOS device, a blank page displays in the web browser.
In the background, CPU usage increases to 90% immediately.
Screen capture of the landing page and CPU monitoring tool
Interestingly, the day after we confirmed this, the attacker switched back to Apple phishing again.
We believe that the criminals, at that time, were testing the possible revenue from web mining on iOS devices, looking for an efficient way to monetize their activities.
One thing we noticed is that the criminals responded to a number of articles and research activities coming from Japan.
The new feature was added in the landing page to filter out Japanese environment:
Added confirmation of Japanese environment for filtering
It looks like they want to slow down infections of Japanese targets for the time being.
In the middle of July 2018, the live landing page we had been monitoring unfortunately went dark.
However, the malicious APK files of Roaming Mantis, detected as “Trojan-Banker.AndroidOS.Wroba.al”, were still being detected by our customers, according to our KSN data.
Number of detected users from KSN data (Jun 10, 2018 – Sep 10, 2018)
Our deeper investigation revealed that their new malware spreading method was the one used by other Android malware, the “sagawa.apk” delivery system.
We published a Japanese blogpost of this Android malware in January 2018.
Trend Micro named it FAKESPY and published a blogpost about it, “FakeSpy Android Information-Stealing Malware Targets Japanese and Korean-Speaking Users”.
According to our previous blogpost, the infection vector involved users received a phishing SMS message spoofing a notification from a Japanese delivery company.
The message contained a malicious URL.
If the user clicked it, the server displayed a fake web site that downloaded and installed the malicious application “sagawa.apk”.
We discovered two types of such “sagawa.apk” samples:
Based on detailed static analysis, they belong to different Android malware families.
Both Type A and Type B have common features, such as monitoring SMS messages and stealing data from infected devices.
However, there are differences in their code structure, communication protocol and other features.
One significant difference is that Type B targets Japan only, unlike Type A which is multilingual.
Type B contains hardcoded strings that are displayed to infected users.
These strings are in Japanese only.
Japanese messages displayed to infected users
In addition, this malware confirms whether a domestic Japanese prepaid card application is installed on the infected device.
Check for the domestic Japanese prepaid card application “Au Wallet”
If the application is installed on the device, the malware downloads and installs a fake application as its update.
Unfortunately, the relationship between the Roaming Mantis group and the service owner of the “sagawa.apk” delivery mechanism isn’t very clear at the moment.
They might just use the same service as customers, or might not.
However, it is clear that these criminal groups use the same malware-spreading eco-system for spreading their Android malware.
Researchers may use the following simplified python scripts to extract the payload from “sagawa.apk”:
sagawa.apk_typeA_payload_extractor.py
