The world during the pandemic prepares many surprises for us.
Most of them are certainly unpleasant: health risks, inability to travel or meet old friends.
One of these unpleasant surprises awaited us in the early spring, when the organizing team of the beloved SAS conference were forced to announce that the event would be postponed to the fall.
Later, another difficult but correct decision was made: to cancel the SAS conference altogether this year.
At the same time, it was the pandemic that gave us the opportunity to invite an unprecedented number of people to the online version of the conference, which we called SAS@Home: more than 2,000 people participated at its peak.
All of them had the opportunity to touch the unique atmosphere of the SAS: to see the coolest IT security experts in the company of their colleagues with whom they have warm and friendly relationships.
Now, this unique year presents us with a new surprise: the second SAS in one calendar year!
Once again, everyone can visit this online event.
Our listeners will plunge into the friendly atmosphere of our cozy online conference to listen to new stories from leading experts and threat hunters from around the world, from the comfort of their own couch.
The speakers are experts at Kaspersky Lab:
Denis Legezo will tell a fascinating story about espionage in industrial companies worthy of the James Bond series.
Tatyana Shishkova will talk about long-running spyware that has been on the radar of analysts for a while but still continues to change and be of interest.
Costin Raiu will take the stage to untangle the issue of location tracking and explain how applications collect our data covertly.
Last but not least, Igor Kuznetsov and Mark Lechtik will share their fresh research disclosing something entirely new and unexpected.
Well-known industry experts from other companies will also join us:
Katie Moussouris, CEO & Founder of Luta Security who has been featured in two Forbes lists: The World’s Top 50 Women in Tech and America’s Top 50 Women in Tech, will talk about Vulnerability Disclosure Programs (VDPs) across many government sectors, and what could possibly go wrong with them.
John Lambert, the Vice President of the Microsoft Threat Intelligence Center, will talk about “githubification” of InfoSec.
Kris McConkey from PwC will present a highly technical demonstration of ways to find victims and C2 servers associated with rare implants from multiple APT actors in situations where it is really hard to obtain any viable samples.
In addition, Ohad Zaidenberg, Marc Rogers, Nate Warfield and Patrick Wardle will share their stories.
Just like during the first SAS@home, the last two days of the conference will be largely devoted to workshops, which will help to pump skills from different areas of digital security:
Vitaly Kamluk will teach how to use professional solutions for remote digital forensics.
Pavel Cheremushkin will share the secrets of his incredible success in searching for vulnerabilities in his workshop on automated discovery of memory corruption vulnerabilities.
SAS@home participants will also have the opportunity to listen to a Virus Total workshop conducted by our friends Vicente Diaz and Juan Infantes Diaz.
This workshop will be of interest to any threat hunter who has not yet discovered all the capabilities offered by Virus Total.
A good friend of the SAS conference, Joe Fitzpatrick of Securing Hardware, will share his extensive knowledge of IoT security.
As always, the SAS is preparing a lot of fun activities and gifts for attendees:
Easter egg challenge for the most attentive listeners.
Mini CTF that will be announced this week.
Three winners will get full access to Kaspersky training course for experts, “Hunt APTs with Yara like a GReAT Ninja“, for free.
All SAS@home participants will receive a discount code for the course that will be valid for the duration of the conference.
All these activities, workshops and presentations will take place on October 6 through 8:
11:00 AM – 2:00 PM Eastern 8:00 AM – 11:00 AM PST 4:00 PM – 7:00 PM London 6:00 PM – 9:00 PM Moscow
You will find the full SAS@Home agenda here: https://thesascon.com/Online
All you need to do to join this awesome conference is register here: https://kas.pr/3e7o
