In April 2012, several stories were published about a mysterious malware attack shutting down computer systems at businesses throughout Iran.
Several articles mentioned that a virus named Wiper was responsible.
Yet, no samples were available from these attacks, causing many to doubt the accuracy of these reports.
Following these incidents, the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) asked Kaspersky Lab to investigate the incidents and determine the potentially destructive impact of this new malware.
After several weeks of research, we failed to find any malware that shared any known properties with Wiper.
However, we did discover the nation-state cyber-espionage campaign now known as Flame and later Gauss.
It is our firm opinion that Wiper was a separate strain of malware that was not Flame.
Although Flame was a highly flexible attack platform, we did not see any evidence of very destructive behavior.
Given the complexity of Flame, one would expect it to be used for long-term surveillance of targets instead of direct sabotage attacks on computer systems.
Of course, it is possible that one of the last stages of the surveillance was the delivery of a Wiper-related payload, but so far we haven’t seen this anywhere.
So, months later, we are left wondering: Just what was Wiper?
During the investigation of the mysterious malware attack in April, we were able to obtain and analyze several hard drive images that were attacked by Wiper.
We can now say with certainty that the incidents took place and that the malware responsible for these attacks existed in April 2012.
Also, we are aware of some very similar incidents that have taken place since December of 2011.
The attacks mostly took place in the last 10 days of the month (between the 21st and 30th ) although we cannot confirm that this was due to a special function being activated on certain dates.
The creators of Wiper were extremely careful to destroy absolutely every single piece of data which could be used to trace the incidents.
So, in every single case we’ve analyzed, almost nothing was left after the activation of Wiper.
It’s important to stress “almost nothing” here because some traces did remain that allowed us to get a better understanding of the attacks.
From some of the destroyed systems we were lucky enough to recover a copy of the registry hive.
The registry hive did not contain any malicious drivers or startup entries.
However, we came up with the idea to look into the hive slack space for deleted entries.
This is what we found:
Interestingly, on 22 April, just before this system went down, a specific registry key was created and then deleted.
The key was a service named “RAHDAUD64”.
It pointed to a file on disk named “~DF78.tmp”, in the “C:WINDOWSTEMP” folder.
The moment we saw this, we immediately recalled Duqu, which used filenames of this format.
In fact, the name Duqu was coined by the Hungarian researcher Boldizsár Bencsáth from the CrySyS lab because it created files named “~dqXX.tmp”.
(see)
We tried to recover the file “~DF78.tmp” from the disk, but found that the physical space where it resided was filled with garbage data.
We found the same “wiping” pattern in several of the other systems we analyzed – a service named “RAHDAUD64” which was deleted just before it is wiped – and its file filled with garbage data.
In these other systems, the RAHDAUD64 service pointed to different filenames, such as “~DF11.tmp” and “~DF3C.tmp”.
So it’s possible the names were random.
Another peculiarity of the wiping process was a specific pattern which was used to trash the files on disk:
Most of the files that were wiped contain this specific pattern that repeats over and over.
Interestingly, it did not overwrite the entire file.
In some cases some portions of the file remained intact, every header of the files were destroyed in the first place.
This was probably caused by the size of the file.
The wiping algorithm was designed to quickly destroy as many files as possible.
Based on the pattern that we know had been used when wiping files, we collected Kaspersky Security Network (KSN) statistics on which files had been destroyed.
In an attempt to reconstruct the Wiper algorithm we came up with the following sequence:
Searching for and wiping files based on their extensions.
List of file extensions:
