Here are answers to the most frequently asked questions related to Icefog, an APT operation targeting entities in Japan and South Korea.
Icefog refers to a cyber-espionage campaign that has been active at least since 2011.
It targets governmental institutions, military contractors, maritime and ship-building groups, telecom operators, satellite operators, industrial and high technology companies and mass media, mainly in South Korea and Japan.
It is likely that the crew targets organizations in the Western world as well, like the U.S. and Europe.
At the moment, we are not disclosing the names of the victims.
Kaspersky Lab is in contact with the targeted organizations as well as government entities in order to help them identify and eradicate the infections.
Our technical research indicates the attackers were interested in targeting a number of entities, mainly in South Korea, Taiwan and Japan.
These include defense industry contractors such as Lig Nex1 and Selectron Industrial Company, shipbuilding companies such as DSME Tech, Hanjin Heavy Industries, telecom operators such as Korea Telecom, media companies such as Fuji TV and the Japan-China Economic Association.
The fact that the organizations above were targeted does not imply the attacks were also successful.
Kaspersky Lab is in contact with the targeted organizations as well as government entities in order to help them identify and eradicate the infections.
One of the most prominent incidents that involved this threat actor took place in 2011, when the Japanese House of Representatives and the House of Councillors were infected
As usual, it-s difficult to get an accurate estimate of the number of victims.
We are only seeing part of the full picture, which shows several dozen Windows victims and more than 350 Mac OS X victims.
It-s important to point out that the vast majority of Mac OS X victims (95%) are in China.
The name “Icefog” comes from a string used in the command-and-control server (C&C) name of one of the malware samples we analyzed.
We also confirmed that the C&C software is named “Dagger Three” (“尖刀三号”) when translated from the Chinese language.
For martial arts fans, “尖刀三号” is similar to “三尖刀”, which is an ancient Chinese weapon.
Note: Another name for the backdoor used in these attacks is “Fucobha”.
At its core, Icefog is a backdoor that serves as an interactive espionage tool that is directly controlled by the attackers.
It does not automatically exfiltrate data but is instead manually operated by the attackers to perform actions directly on the infected live systems.
During Icefog attacks, several other malicious tools and backdoors are uploaded to the victims’ machines for lateral movement and data exfiltration.
Icefog is distributed to targets via spear-phishing e-mails which can either have attachments or links to malicious websites.
The attackers embed exploits for several known vulnerabilities (eg.
CVE-2012-1856 and CVE-2012-0158) into Microsoft Word and Excel documents.
Once these files are opened by the target, a backdoor is dropped onto the system and a decoy document is then showed to the victim.
Lure document shown to the victim upon successful execution of the exploit.
