Recently WikiLeaks published a report that, among other things, claims to disclose tools and tactics employed by a state-sponsored organization to break into users’ computers and circumvent installed security solutions.
The list of compromised security products includes dozens of vendors and relates to the whole cybersecurity industry.
The published report includes a description of vulnerabilities in software products that can be used to bypass protection and jeopardize users’ security.
Customers’ security is a top priority for Kaspersky Lab, and as such we take any information that could undermine users’ protection very seriously.
We thoroughly investigate all reported vulnerabilities.
The published report contains descriptions of two vulnerabilities in Kaspersky Lab’s products that have already been fixed.
It also includes a number of mentions related to the company’s technologies and past Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) research.
I’d like to take this opportunity to address possible concerns regarding the report and provide reliable first-hand information to demonstrate that no current Kaspersky Lab products and technologies are vulnerable.
First of all, I’d like to emphasize that the vulnerabilities in Kaspersky Lab’s products listed in the report are related to older versions of the products, and they were publicly disclosed and fixed some time ago.
The current versions of our products are not vulnerable to the tools and tactics listed.
The “heapgrd” DLL inject vulnerability was discovered and fixed in Kaspersky Lab products back in 2009.
The vulnerability allowed a malefactor to load a third-party DLL instead of the WHEAPGRD.dll file and thus bypass protection.
It was patched starting with Kaspersky Internet Security 9 and Kaspersky Antivirus for Workstations MP4.
The products that were mentioned in relation to these vulnerabilities (Kaspersky Internet Security 7 and 8 and Kaspersky Antivirus for Workstations MP3) are outdated and no longer supported.
All current Kaspersky Lab solutions are subject to mandatory testing against these vulnerabilities prior to release.
The TDSS Killer’s DLL inject vulnerability mentioned in the WikiLeaks report was fixed in 2015.
The report also says Kaspersky Lab’s security solutions do not block DLL injections into user processes and svchost.exe.
In fact, we do protect against this sort of attack — in a smarter way that elegantly combines protection and a better user experience.
Nowadays, it’s common practice for legitimate applications to inject their code into user processes.
To effectively distinguish legitimate from malicious actions, track changes, and restore unwanted amendments an application may make to the system, Kaspersky Lab’s products have included the System Watcher component since 2011.
System Watcher monitors all processes on a device, including svchost.exe, and is capable of detecting malicious behavior, blocking it, and rolling back malicious changes.
The report also describes several tools and malicious programs that were used to collect data and infiltrate the users’ computers.
However, all of them can be neutralized with Kaspersky Lab’s products.
Let’s take a closer look at them.
First, the RickyBobby fileless Trojan is allegedly not detected by Kaspersky Lab’s products, which is not the case.
All personal and enterprise level products can detect this Trojan, prevent the infection, and disinfect a system that was protected by a third-party or outdated security solution.
Second, the report mentions two other malware samples (Fine Dining and Grasshopper) that allegedly are not detected by Kaspersky Lab’s products.
However, the report doesn’t provide further details of the malware.
We will keep investigating the issue and report the findings as soon as details are available.
That said, we are skeptical: It’s said Fine Dining relies on the aforementioned DLL inject vulnerability in TDSS Killer, which is already fixed.
Also it’s worth mentioning that Kaspersky products provide multiple layers of protection — such as emulation, heuristics, System Watcher, and Automatic Exploit Prevention — including those powered by industry-leading machine learning
