The Kaspersky Lab Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT) is starting a series of regular publications about our research devoted to the threat landscape for industrial organizations.
All statistical data used in the report was obtained using Kaspersky Security Network (KSN), a distributed antivirus network.
Data was received from those KSN users who consented to have their data collected anonymously.
The research carried out in the second half of 2016 by Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT experts clearly demonstrates a number of trends in the evolution of industrial enterprise security.
On average, in the second half of 2016 Kaspersky Lab products across the globe blocked attempted attacks on 39.2% of protected computers that Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT classifies as being part of industrial enterprise technology infrastructure.
This group includes computers that run Windows and perform one or more of the following functions: Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) servers, Data storage servers (Historian), Data gateways (OPC), Stationary engineer and operator workstations, Mobile engineer and operator workstations, Human Machine Interface (HMI).
The group also includes computers of external 3-d party contractors, SCADA vendors and system integrators as well as internal SCADA administrators.
On average, in the second half of 2016 Kaspersky Lab products across the globe blocked attempted attacks on 39.2% of protected computers that Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT classifies as being part of industrial enterprise technology infrastructure.
This group includes computers that run Windows and perform one or more of the following functions:
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) servers,
Data storage servers (Historian),
Data gateways (OPC),
Stationary engineer and operator workstations,
Mobile engineer and operator workstations,
Human Machine Interface (HMI).
The group also includes computers of external 3-d party contractors, SCADA vendors and system integrators as well as internal SCADA administrators.
Every month, an average of one industrial computer in five (20.1%) is attacked by malware.
We have seen stable growth in the percentage of industrial computers attacked since the beginning of our observations, highlighting the importance of cybersecurity issues.
Percentage of industrial computers attacked by month (second half of 2016)
Every month, an average of one industrial computer in five (20.1%) is attacked by malware.
We have seen stable growth in the percentage of industrial computers attacked since the beginning of our observations, highlighting the importance of cybersecurity issues.
Percentage of industrial computers attacked by month (second half of 2016)
Isolation of industrial networks can no longer be considered an effective protective measure.
The proportion of malware infection attempts involving portable media, infection of backup copies, use of sophisticated schemes for transferring data from isolated networks in complex attacks – all of this demonstrates that risks cannot be avoided by simply disconnecting a system from the Internet.
Sources of threats blocked on industrial computers (second half of 2016)
Sources of threats blocked on industrial computers (second half of 2016)
Remarkably, there is very little difference between the rankings of malware detected on industrial computers and those of malware detected on corporate computers.
We believe that this demonstrates the absence of significant differences between computers on corporate networks and those on industrial networks in terms of the risk of chance infections.
However, it is obvious that even a chance infection on an industrial network can lead to dangerous consequences.
Distribution of industrial computers attacked by classes of malware used in attacks (second half of 2016)
