For many years, Kaspersky Lab experts have been uncovering and researching cyberthreats that target a variety of information systems – those of commercial and government organizations, banks, telecoms operators, industrial enterprises, and individual users.
In this report, Kaspersky Lab Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT) publishes the findings of its research on the threat landscape for industrial automation systems conducted during the second half of 2017.
The main objective of these publications is to provide information support to global and local incident response teams, enterprise information security staff and researchers in the area of industrial facility security.
The analysis of vulnerabilities was performed based on vendor advisories, publicly available information from open vulnerability databases (ICS-CERT, CVE, Siemens Product CERT), as well as the results of Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT’s own research.
Vulnerability data published on the ICS-CERT website in 2017 was used to create statistical diagrams.
In 2017, the total number of vulnerabilities identified in different ICS components and published on the ICS-CERT website was 322.
This includes vulnerabilities identified in general-purpose software and in network protocols that are also relevant to industrial software and equipment.
These vulnerabilities are discussed in this report separately.
The largest number of vulnerabilities affect industrial control systems in the energy sector (178), manufacturing processes at various enterprises (164), water supply (97) and transportation (74).
Number of vulnerable products used in different industries(according to ICS-CERT classification)vulnerabilities published in 2017
More than half (194) of the vulnerabilities identified in ICS systems were assigned CVSS v.3.0 base scores of 7 or higher, corresponding to a high or critical level of risk.
Table 1 – Distribution of published vulnerabilities by risk level
The highest severity score of 10 was assigned to vulnerabilities identified in the following products:
iniNet Solutions GmbH SCADA Webserver,
Westermo MRD-305-DIN, MRD-315, MRD-355, and MRD-455,
Hikvision Cameras,
Sierra Wireless AirLink Raven XE and XT,
Schneider Electric Modicon M221 PLCs and SoMachine Basic,
BINOM3 Electric Power Quality Meter,
Carlo Gavazzi VMU-C EM and VMU-C PV.
All vulnerabilities that were assigned the severity rating of 10 have much in common: they have to do with authentication issues, can be exploited remotely and are easy to exploit.
In addition, the highest severity rating was assigned to a vulnerability in the Modicon Modbus Protocol, which is discussed below.
It should be noted that the CVSS base score does not account for the aspects of security that are specific to industrial automation systems or for the distinctive characteristics of each organization’s industrial processes.
This is why, when assessing the severity of a vulnerability, we recommend keeping in mind, in addition to the CVSS score, the possible consequences of its exploitation, such as the non-availability or limited availability of ICS functionality that affects the continuity of the industrial process.
The most common types of vulnerabilities include buffer overflow (Stack-Based Buffer Overflow, Heap-Based Buffer Overflow) and improper authentication (Improper Authentication).
At the same time, 23% of all vulnerabilities identified are web-related (Injection, Path Traversal, Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF), Cross-Site Scripting) and 21% are associated with authentication issues (Improper Authentication, Authentication Bypass, Missing Authentication for Critical Function) and with access control problems (Access Control, Incorrect Default Permissions, Improper Privilege Management, Credentials Management).
Most common vulnerability types
Exploitation of vulnerabilities in various ICS components by attackers can lead to arbitrary code execution, unauthorized control of industrial equipment and that equipment’s denial of service (DoS).
Importantly, most vulnerabilities (265) can be exploited remotely without authentication and exploiting them does not require the attacker to have any specialized knowledge or superior skills.
Exploits have been published for 17 vulnerabilities, increasing the risk of their exploitation for malicious purposes.
The largest number of vulnerabilities were identified in:
SCADA/HMI components (88),
networking devices designed for industrial environments (66),
PLCs (52),
and engineering software (52).
Vulnerable components also include protection relays, emergency shutdown systems, environmental monitoring systems and industrial video surveillance systems.
Distribution of vulnerabilities identified by ICS components
An important part of ICS software security research in 2017 was identifying serious vulnerabilities in implementations of industrial protocols.
Specifically, vulnerabilities were identified in the implementation of the Modbus Protocol in Modicon series controllers (that vulnerability was assigned a CVSS v. 3 base score of 10), as well as in implementations of the OPC UA protocol stack and in an implementation of the PROFINET Discovery and Configuration Protocol.
The security issues identified affect entire product families.
In addition to ICS-specific vulnerabilities, a number of serious flaws were identified in H2 2017 in software platforms and network protocols that can be exploited to attack industrial systems.
The vulnerabilities in the WPA2 protocol unexpectedly turned out to be relevant to industrial solutions.
They were found to affect equipment from several vendors, including Cisco, Rockwell Automation, Sierra Wireless, ABB and Siemens.
Industrial control systems were also affected by multiple vulnerabilities in the Dnsmasq DNS server, Java Runtime Environment, Oracle Java SE, and Cisco IOS and IOS XE.
Vulnerabilities in Intel products can also affect the security of industrial equipment.
In the second half of 2017, information on several vulnerabilities in Intel products (ME, SPS and TXE) was published.
These vulnerabilities affect mainly SCADA server hardware and industrial computers that use vulnerable CPUs.
These include, for example, Automation PC 910 by B&R, Nuvo-5000 by Neousys and the GE Automation RXi2-XP product line.
As a rule, vendors do not consider it necessary to release public advisories on vulnerabilities of this type (derived from using third-party technologies).
Of course, there are some positive exceptions.
For example, Siemens AG has released an advisory stating that these vulnerabilities affect a range of the company’s products.
Earlier, the company published information about similar vulnerabilities in Intel technologies affecting its products.
2017 was marked by a growing number of vulnerabilities being identified in internet of things (IoT) devices.
As a consequence, such vulnerabilities were increasingly often exploited to create botnets.
The activity of three new botnets was uncovered in the last two months of 2017 only.
These included the Reaper botnet and new Mirai variants, including the Satori botnet.
Multiple vulnerabilities were identified in Dlink 850L routers, WIFICAM wireless IP cameras, Vacron network video recorders and other devices.
On top of the new IoT device flaws, some old vulnerabilities are still not closed, such as CVE-2014-8361 in Realtek devices and the vulnerability dating back to 2012 that can be exploited to get the configuration of Serial-to-Ethernet converters, including the Telnet password, by sending a request on port 30718.
The vulnerability in Serial-to-Ethernet converters directly affects the industrial internet of things (IIoT), since many systems that enable the operators of industrial equipment to remotely control its status, modify its settings and control its operation are based on serial interface converters.
The security of IoT devices is also affected by issues relating to the security of traditional information technology.
Specifically, vulnerabilities in implementations of the Bluetooth protocol led to the emergence of the new attack vector, BlueBorne, which poses a threat to mobile, desktop and IoT operating systems.
In 2017, Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT experts not only analyzed the security issues associated with different vendors’ ICS components, but also focused on the common ICS components, platforms and technologies used in different vendors’ solutions.
This type of research is important because vulnerabilities in such components significantly increase the number of potential attack victims.
Research in this area continues in 2018.
Based on its research, Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT identified 63 vulnerabilities in industrial and IIoT/IoT systems in 2017.
Distribution of vulnerabilities identified by Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT in 2017by types of components analyzed
Every time we identified a vulnerability, we promptly notified the respective product’s vendor.
During 2017, 11 CVE entries were published based on information about vulnerabilities identified by Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT.
It should be noted that some of these CVE entries were published after vendors closed vulnerabilities information on which had been provided to them in 2016.
Information on other vulnerabilities identified by Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT experts will be published after these vulnerabilities are closed by the respective vendors.
The largest number of vulnerabilities identified (29) could allow an attacker to cause denial of service (DoS) remotely.
8% of the vulnerabilities identified could allow an attacker to execute arbitrary code remotely on the target system.
Distribution of vulnerabilities identified by Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT in 2017by capabilities provided
In 2017, Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT experts identified 30 vulnerabilities in ICS products from different vendors.
These are mainly large automation system vendors, such as Schneider Electric, Siemens, Rockwell Automation, Emerson, and others.
To assess the severity of vulnerabilities identified in ICS components, Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT used its own vulnerability rating system based on the metrics defined in CVSS v3.0 (Common Vulnerability Scoring System) standard, with the following vulnerability severity levels identified:
least severe: CVSS v3.0 base score of 5.0 or less,
medium severity: CVSS v3.0 base score of 5.1 to 6.9 (inclusive),
most severe: CVSS v3.0 base score of 7.0 or more.
The absolute majority of vulnerabilities identified are in the most severe group.
These include the XXE vulnerability in industrial solutions that use the Discovery Service of the OPC UA protocol stack.
One of the research areas involved searching for vulnerabilities in different implementations of the OPC UA technology.
This type of research is needed to improve the overall security level of products from different vendors that use the technology in their solutions.
Vulnerabilities in such technologies are a Swiss army knife of sorts for attackers, enabling them to hack industrial systems from different vendors.
A total of 17 critical denial-of-service vulnerabilities were identified during the period.
Some of the vulnerabilities were identified in sample software implementations of various OPC UA functions available in the official Github repository.
In the process of communicating to several vendors of industrial automation systems, we found out that many of them had used code from such samples in their product code.
This means that the vulnerabilities identified may affect complete product lines from different vendors.
Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT experts have also analyzed third-party hardware-based solutions that are widely used in industrial automation systems.
Specifically, experts analyzed the SafeNet Sentinel hardware-based solution by Gemalto.
As a result of the research, 15 vulnerabilities were identified in the software part of the solution (11 in December 2016 and 4 in 2017).
These flaws affect a large number of products that use the vulnerable software, including solutions by ABB, General Electric, HP, Cadac Group, Zemax and other software developers, the number of which may reach 40 thousand, according to some estimates.
Another area of research was the assessment of the information security status of internet of things (IoT), components, including industrial internet of things (IIoT) components.
Kaspersky Lab experts are working with vendors to improve the security of their solutions with respect to 11 vulnerabilities identified.
Vulnerabilities were found in the following components and solutions:
smart cameras,
hardware-based IIoT solutions.
It should be noted that vulnerabilities in implementations of OPC UA standards, which are discussed above, also directly affect IIoT security.
In the past year, 18 vulnerabilities were identified in industrial networking equipment from different vendors.
Typical vulnerabilities: information disclosure, privilege escalation, arbitrary code execution, denial of service.
With respect to information on the vulnerabilities identified, Kaspersky Lab follows the principle of responsible information disclosure, promptly reporting vulnerabilities to the respective software vendors.
In 2017, Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT researchers actively collaborated with various companies to ensure that the vulnerabilities identified would be closed.
Of the 63 vulnerabilities identified by Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT in 2017, vendors closed 26.
Vulnerabilities were closed by Siemens, General Electric, Rockwell Automation, Gemalto and the OPC Foundation industrial consortium.
It should be noted that most vendors of software for industrial automation systems that we have worked with have lately been devoting much more care and resources to the task of closing the vulnerabilities identified and fixing information security issues in their products, including their earlier versions.
At the same time, the issue of closing vulnerabilities in industrial automation systems remains relevant.
In many cases, it takes large vendors a long time to close vulnerabilities in their products.
Sometimes software vendors decide to patch only new versions of a vulnerable product, which they are planning to release in the future.
In addition, some vendors still need to improve the organizational and technical aspects of the procedures they use to inform customers about the vulnerabilities patched.
Even after an update has been released, many users are unaware of the relevant security issue and use vulnerable versions of the product.
This is particularly important for embedded software, as well as the technologies and specific program modules used by numerous third-party vendors (one example can be found here).
Positive examples include Siemens and the OPC Foundation, which have quickly closed the vulnerabilities identified and released public advisories on existing vulnerabilities.
As we have mentioned before, many industrial companies use modern networking technologies that improve the transparency and efficiency of enterprise management processes, as well as providing flexibility and fault tolerance for all tiers of industrial automation.
As a result, industrial networks are increasingly similar to corporate networks – both in terms of use case scenarios and in terms of the technologies used.
The unfortunate flip side of this is that internet threats, as well as other traditional IT threats, increasingly affect the industrial networks of modern organizations.
In the second half of 2017, Kaspersky Lab security solutions installed on industrial automation systems detected over 17.9 thousand different malware modifications from about 2.4 thousand different malware families.
In the vast majority of cases, attempts to infect ICS computers are accidental and are not part of targeted attacks.
Consequently, the functionality implemented in malware is not specific to attacks on industrial automation systems.
However, even without ICS-specific functionality, a malware infection can have dire consequences for an industrial automation system, including an emergency shutdown of the industrial process.
This was demonstrated by the WannaCry outbreak in May 2017, when several enterprises in different industries had to suspend their industrial processes after being infected with the encryption malware.
We wrote about encryption malware-related threats in our previous report and several articles (see here and here).
It is important to note that some IT threats can do much more significant harm in an industrial network than in an office network.
To demonstrate this, we look at two incidents investigated by the Kaspersky Lab ICS-CERT team.
In H2 2017, we were approached by several industrial enterprises at once, where mass infections of industrial networks with WannaCry encryption malware had been detected.
It was later determined that the initial infections of office networks at the victim companies had in all the cases taken place back in the first half of 2017, at the height of the WannaCry outbreak.
However, the infections were not noticed until the malware propagated to the enterprises’ industrial networks.
As it turned out during investigation, encryption functionality in the malware samples was damaged and the infected systems on corporate networks continued to operate normally, without any failures.
However, the infection of industrial networks in these cases had unexpected negative consequences.
At one of the enterprises infected by WannaCry, the workstations used by operators started to bring up the Blue Screen of Death all the time, leading to emergency reboots.
The reason for this unexpected consequence of infection was that the machines ran Windows XP.
It is a well-known fact that the DoublePulsar exploit used by WannaCry to propagate causes WindowsXP to crash, resulting in a Blue Screen of Death and a reboot.
In cases when numerous machines in the industrial segment of an organization’s network are infected, WindowsXP machines are often attacked and go into emergency reboots.
As a result, operators are rendered incapable of monitoring and controlling the industrial process.
This makes WannaCry a denial-of-service attack tool of sorts.
In another incident, the propagation of WannaCry caused some of the devices on an enterprise’s industrial network to become temporarily unavailable during periods when the network activity of the malware coincided with certain stages in the industrial process.
This resulted in emergency interruptions of an industrial process that was critical for the enterprise for an average of 15 minutes.
According to Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT data, cryptocurrency mining programs attacked 3.3% of industrial automation system computers during the period from February 2017 to January 2018.
Up to August 2017, the percentage of ICS computers attacked by cryptocurrency miners did not exceed 1%.
This figure grew in September and did not go back to less than 1% for the rest of 2017.
In October, cryptocurrency miner attacks against ICS computers peaked, with 2.07% of ICS computers being attacked.
Percentage of ICS computers attacked by cryptocurrency mining malware
Like other malware infecting systems at industrial enterprises, cryptocurrency miners can pose a threat to industrial process monitoring and control.
In the process of its operation, malware of this type creates a significant load on the computer’s computational resources.
An increased load on processors can negatively affect the operation of the enterprise’s ICS components and threaten their stability.
According to our assessments, in most cases cryptocurrency miners infect ICS computers accidentally.
There is no reliable information on machines that are part of the industrial network infrastructure being infected as a result of targeted attacks the goal of which is to mine cryptocurrencies, with the exception of cases when miners are installed by unscrupulous employees of victim enterprises.
The cryptocurrency mining malware typically enters the industrial network infrastructure from the internet or, less commonly, from removable media or network shares.
Sources of ICS computer infections with cryptocurrency minersPercentage of systems attacked, February 2017 – January 2018
