Nigerian scammers
Tell us the tales!
Oh, the people you’ll meet!
Don’t believe your eyes
An online friend of mine from a small Siberian town recently posted on her blog about how her mother fell for a scam and lost the family savings in hopes of getting some nonexistent inheritance from Africa.
My friend gave her elderly parents a computer, but it did them more harm than good.
They received an email — allegedly from the employee of a bank — written in poor English but with amazing news: Anna Sergeyevna (name changed), my friend’s mother, was in line for a million-dollar inheritance.
As it turned out, they had a relative in Africa, Mr. John Sergeyev, who had passed away.
Mr. Sergeyev had no heirs, but his lawyer began to search for his client’s relatives online, and after much time and effort, he had finally found them in this small Siberian town.
After a short email exchange, the apparent heiress was asked to wire over some cash to cover overheads before the inheritance could be delivered.
My friend’s mother wired over several thousand dollars through the local Sberbank branch to the account specified in the email.
After that, all communication stopped — emails and phone calls elicited no response.
Unfortunately, Anna Sergeyevna was yet another victim of the so-called Nigerian scammers.
Their scams (also called Nigerian 419 scams) are fairly straightforward: they send out emails typically requesting assistance in cashing out a very large sum of money (usually worth millions of dollars), proposing to split a large share of someone else’s money with the recipient, or telling the recipient that they are due to receive a large inheritance.
But in order to successfully execute these transactions, the intermediary or the alleged heir needs to first cover some minor (compared to the riches to come) costs.
The scammers are always armed with scanned documents to show their potential victims, and back up their claims with evidence of legal support or the word of a respectable figure which backs up the tales told in the initial email.
Regardless of the fine print, though, the result is always the same: once they get your money, they vanish.
Each month, Kaspersky Lab filters intercept tens of thousands of Nigerian scam letters in different languages.
These 419 scams have been covered online and in the press.
But there will always be people who have either just started to use the World Wide Web or who choose not to listen to sound advice, and those who are simply naïve and genuinely believe the scammers’ promises.
These scams have been doing the rounds for some time: the first Nigerian scam letters offering large sums of money appeared in the 1980s and were sent then by plain old snail mail.
With the emergence of the Internet, Nigerian scammers welcomed the new advantages of emails.
These days, Nigerian scam mailings are organized by scammers in countries all over the world.
The first Nigerian scam letters were allegedly written by the widows or children of Nigerian government officials, whose millions could only be cashed abroad.
This is how the scam took on the name of “Nigerian” scam letters.
Later, the stories fabricated by the scammers became more varied and inspired, and even won the Ig Nobel Prize (an American parody of the Nobel Prizes) for literature in 2005.
Typically, scammers have just a few tricks in their bag that can be combined in one email.
Nevertheless, each premise has several variations: the names used can be those of politicians, the fatal diseases and stories involving bloody murders can sometimes be impressive, and the amounts of money are always substantial — nothing less than fifty thousand dollars or euros.
Below is one example of the classic Nigerian email, where the author discusses the death of his father.
Only in this example, to bring it into line with the latest news, the father was not killed during the Nigerian civil war, but was instead a victim of Gaddafi’s regime.
