Intuit warns QuickBooks customers of ongoing phishing attacks
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Microsoft: Russian state hackers behind 53% of attacks on US govt agencies
Twitch game page backgrounds defaced with Jeff Bezos' face
Bank of America insider charged with money laundering for BEC scams
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
This $30 course helps you become an Apple-certified macOS expert
How to remove the PBlock+ adware browser extension
Remove the Toksearches.xyz Search Redirect
Remove the Smashapps.net Search Redirect
Remove the Smashappsearch.com Search Redirect
Remove Security Tool and SecurityTool (Uninstall Guide)
How to remove Antivirus 2009 (Uninstall Instructions)
How to Remove WinFixer / Virtumonde / Msevents / Trojan.vundo
How to remove Google Redirects or the TDSS, TDL3, or Alureon rootkit using TDSSKiller
Locky Ransomware Information, Help Guide, and FAQ
CryptoLocker Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
CryptorBit and HowDecrypt Information Guide and FAQ
CryptoDefense and How_Decrypt Ransomware Information Guide and FAQ
How to make the Start menu full screen in Windows 10
How to install the Microsoft Visual C++ 2015 Runtime
How to open an elevated PowerShell Admin prompt in Windows 10
How to Translate a Web Page in Google Chrome
How to start Windows in Safe Mode
How to remove a Trojan, Virus, Worm, or other Malware
How to show hidden files in Windows 7
How to see hidden files in Windows
Microsoft says that an Emotet infection was able to take down an organization's entire network by maxing out CPUs on Windows devices and bringing its Internet connection down to a crawl after one employee was tricked to open a phishing email attachment.
"After a phishing email delivered Emotet, a polymorphic virus that propagates via network shares and legacy protocols, the virus shut down the organization’s core services," DART said.
"The virus avoided detection by antivirus solutions through regular updates from an attacker-controlled command-and-control (C2) infrastructure, and spread through the company’s systems, causing network outages and shutting down essential services for nearly a week."
The Emotet payload was delivered and executed on the systems of Fabrikam — a fake name Microsoft gave the victim in their case study — five days after the employee's user credentials were exfiltrated to the attacker's command and control (C&C) server.
Before this, the threat actors used the stolen credentials to deliver phishing emails to other Fabrikam employees, as well as to their external contacts, with more and more systems getting infected and downloading additional malware payloads.
The malware further spread through the network without raising any red flags by stealing admin account credentials authenticating itself on new systems, later used as stepping stones to compromise other devices.
"When the last of their machines overheated, Fabrikam knew the problem had officially spun out of control.
'We want to stop this hemorrhaging,' an official would later say," DART's case study report reads.
"He’d been told the organization had an extensive system to prevent cyberattacks, but this new virus evaded all their firewalls and antivirus software.
Now, as they watched their computers blue-screen one by one, they didn’t have any idea what to do next."
Based on what the official said following the incident, although not officially confirmed, the attack described by Microsoft's Detection and Response Team (DART) matches a malware attack that impacted the city of Allentown, Pennsylvania in February 2018, as ZDNet first noticed.
At the time, Mayor Ed Pawlowski said that the city had to pay nearly $1 million to Microsoft to clean out their systems, with an initial $185,000 emergency-response fee to contain the malware and up to $900,000 in additional recovery costs, as first reported by The Morning Call.
"Officials announced that the virus threatened all of Fabrikam’s systems, even its 185-surveillance camera network," DART's report says.
"Its finance department couldn’t complete any external banking transactions, and partner organizations couldn’t access any databases controlled by Fabrikam.
"They couldn’t tell whether an external cyberattack from a hacker caused the shutdown or if they were dealing with an internal virus.
It would have helped if they could have even accessed their network accounts.
"Emotet consumed the network’s bandwidth until using it for anything became practically impossible.
Even emails couldn’t wriggle through."
Microsoft's DART — a remote team and one that would deal with the attack on site — was called in eight days after the first device on Fabrikam's network was compromised.
DART contained the Emotet infection using asset controls and buffer zones designed to isolate assets with admin privileges.
They eventually were able to completely eradicate the Emotet infection after uploading new antivirus signatures and deploying Microsoft Defender ATP and Azure ATP trials to detect and remove the malware.
Microsoft recommends using email filtering tools to automatically detect and stop phishing emails that spread the Emotet infection, as well as the adoption of multi-factor authentication (MFA) to stop the attackers from taking advantage of stolen credentials.
Emotet, originally spotted as a banking Trojan in 2014, has evolved into a malware loader used by threat actors to install other malware families including but not limited to the Trickbot banking Trojan (a known vector used in the delivery of Ryuk ransomware payloads).
Emotet was recently upgraded with a Wi-Fi worm module designed to help it spread to new victims via nearby insecure wireless networks.
Recently, in January 2020, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) warned government and private organizations, as well as home users, of increasing activity around targeted Emotet attacks.
Emotet ranked first in a 'Top 10 most prevalent threats' ranking published by interactive malware analysis platform Any.Run at the end of December 2019, with triple the number of sample uploads submitted for analysis when compared to the next malware in the top, the Agent Tesla info-stealer.
CISA provides general best practices to limit the effect of Emotet attacks and to contain network infections within an Emotet Malware alert published two years ago and updated earlier this year.
Microsoft: Nobelium uses custom malware to backdoor Windows domains
New malware uses Windows Subsystem for Linux for stealthy attacks
New Windows security updates break network printing
Microsoft adds tamper protection to Windows 11 security baseline
Windows 11: Microsoft is investigating these eight problems
Emotet never ceases to evolve D:
Google warns 14,000 Gmail users targeted by Russian hackers
Apache emergency update fixes incomplete patch for exploited bug
To receive periodic updates and news from BleepingComputer, please use the form below.
Terms of Use -  Privacy Policy - Ethics Statement
Copyright @ 2003 - 2021  Bleeping Computer® LLC  - All Rights Reserved
Read our posting guidelinese to learn what content is prohibited.
