We offer flexibility to our customers with a full set of deployment and purchasing options.
We offer flexibility to our customers with a full set of deployment and purchasing options.
Howdy, and welcome to the ThreatConnect Research Roundup, a collection of recent findings by our Research Team and items from open source publications that have resulted in Observations of related indicators across ThreatConnect’s CAL™ (Collective Analytics Layer).
Note: Viewing the pages linked in this blog post requires a ThreatConnect account.
If you don’t have one, please click here to request your free TC Open account.
In this edition, we cover:
Sandworm Related Intelligence in ThreatConnect
Our highlight in this Roundup is Incident 20200529A: Network of Probable Sandworm Infrastructure.
Sandworm, also known as Sandworm Team, Quedagh, and VOODOO BEAR, is a Russian threat actor group that has historically targeted energy, industrial, government, and media organizations in Ukraine.
ThreatConnect Research, in conjunction with industry colleagues, identified a network of probable Sandworm infrastructure dating back to at least 2018.
NSA released a report on Sandworm activity on May 29 2020 that identified the domain hostapp.be (IPs: 95.216.13[.
This domain was registered on December 24 2018 through Njalla.
In reviewing historical registrations, we were only able to identify seven other domains that were registered on that date through Njalla.
While we were unable to directly associate any of these domains to hostapp.be due to its lack of a creation timestamp, three of the other domains — fbapp[.
]link — appeared notable and possibly related.
We reviewed the hosting history, subdomains, and co-locations for these additional domains and to-date have identified a network of 30 domains, 17 IPs, and hundreds of subdomains that we assess probably are related with largely historic Sandworm activity.
Further indicative of the probable association to Sandworm, some of the identified domains, such as hostapp[.
]link, share strings with the domain identified in NSA’s report.
In reviewing subdomains for the identified domains, many subdomains strings were reused across the domains.
Many Twitter, Google, and Facebook-related subdomains were identified.
The following notable subdomain strings were also identified and possibly are indicative of operational targets, themes, or affected countries:
It’s important to note that while the identified infrastructure is largely historic, at least two domains — userarea[.
]190) — and/or their subdomains were actively resolving in May 2020.
At this time, we do not have any additional insight into how or against whom this infrastructure has been operationalized.
ThreatConnect Research identified another set of domains and IPs that are a part of this network of probable Sandworm infrastructure.
The following domains were registered through Njalla at essentially the same time as userarea[.
]eu and are currently hosted on dedicated servers:
Three other domains were registered through Njalla about two and a half hours later:
Notably, four of these IP addresses were identified by GreyNoise as exploiting the Exim vulnerability CVE-2019-10149.
Two other domains — userzone[.
]eu — are associated with this network of infrastructure.
These domains were registered through Njalla on November 13 2019, the same day as those in the previous update.
These domains and/or their subdomains have been hosted on a dedicated server at 141.101.196[.
ThreatConnect Research Team Intelligence: Items recently created or updated in the ThreatConnect Common Community by our Research Team.
Technical Blogs and Reports Incidents with Active and Observed Indicators: Incidents associated to one or more Indicators with an Active status and at least one global Observation across the ThreatConnect community.
These analytics are provided by ThreatConnect’s CAL™ (Collective Analytics Layer).
To receive ThreatConnect notifications about any of the above, remember to check the “Follow Item” box on that item’s Details page.
The ThreatConnect Research Team: is an elite group of globally-acknowledged cybersecurity experts, dedicated to tracking down existing and emerging cyber threats.
We scrutinize trends, technology and socio-political motivators to develop comprehensive knowledge of the cyber landscape.
Then, we share what we’ve learned so that you can protect your organization, and your team can take precise action against threats.
Suite 550
Arlington, VA 22203
Directions
Toll Free: +1.800.965.2708
Local: +1.703.229.4240
Fax: +1.703.229.4489
By Industry
By Role
By Need
How to Buy
About
Leadership
Methodology
Research Team
Careers
Learn More
Knowledge Base
Github Repository
15 Bishopsgate
London, EC2N 3AR
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 208 138 8482
Bloc F, Etaj 1
The Office
Bulevardul 21 Decembrie 1989
400124
Cluj Napoca
Romania
©2012- 2021 ThreatConnect, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Privacy Policy | Sitemap | Terms of Service
To give you the easiest possible experience, this site uses cookies.
Find out more about our Privacy Policy and Cookie Policy.
By continuing to use this site, you are giving us your consent to do this.
We may request cookies to be set on your device.
We use cookies to let us know when you visit our websites, how you interact with us, to enrich your user experience, and to customize your relationship with our website.
Click on the different category headings to find out more.
You can also change some of your preferences.
Note that blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience on our websites and the services we are able to offer.
These cookies are strictly necessary to provide you with services available through our website and to use some of its features.
Because these cookies are strictly necessary to deliver the website, refuseing them will have impact how our site functions.
You always can block or delete cookies by changing your browser settings and force blocking all cookies on this website.
But this will always prompt you to accept/refuse cookies when revisiting our site.
We fully respect if you want to refuse cookies but to avoid asking you again and again kindly allow us to store a cookie for that.
You are free to opt out any time or opt in for other cookies to get a better experience.
If you refuse cookies we will remove all set cookies in our domain.
We provide you with a list of stored cookies on your computer in our domain so you can check what we stored.
Due to security reasons we are not able to show or modify cookies from other domains.
You can check these in your browser security settings.
We also use different external services like Google Webfonts, Google Maps, and external Video providers.
Since these providers may collect personal data like your IP address we allow you to block them here.
Please be aware that this might heavily reduce the functionality and appearance of our site.
Changes will take effect once you reload the page.
Vimeo and Youtube video embeds:
