Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
TA542, an actor that distributes Emotet malware, took an extensive break from delivering malicious emails in 2020.
They were absent from the landscape for over five months, last seen on February 7 before returning on July 17, 2020.
While Emotet usually takes breaks throughout the year, this was the longest known vacation for the group.
Despite this break, Emotet continues to be a dangerous threat and below we’ve detailed their delivery methods, regional targeting, and an analysis into their use of Qbot.
Now that they are back, TA542 email campaigns are once again the most prevalent by message volume by a large margin, with only a few other actors coming close.
Proofpoint has blocked hundreds of thousands of messages (sometimes coming close to one million) each day.
There is no clear industry targeting among TA542 campaigns.
While there are some innovations and incremental changes, Proofpoint researchers have noted surprisingly minimal change in TA542’s tactics or tooling, considering the long break.
Many trends observed previously still remain relevant.
Significant new changes and innovations include:
Only small incremental changes were observed in:
Figure 1: Indexed volume of email messages containing Emotet (from April 19, 2017 to August 18, 2020)
Before diving into the analysis, it’s important to mention that Proofpoint and other researchers were able to see warnings that Emotet was about to return.
Those watching active Emotet infections took notice that new email sending modules were received.
It's also possible to watch for unusual (old) Emotet email in inboxes.
On July 14, 2020 Proofpoint researchers spotted emails with old Emotet URLs, specifically those that were previously seen in the last known Emotet campaign on February 7, 2020.
These emails came from many sender IPs, as if multiple emotet bots reactivated.
Emotet malspam is very different from other malware email campaigns in that it starts early and lasts throughout the whole day, making it hard to determine the end of one campaign and beginning of the next.
However, in general, campaigns start at night between 1:00am EST and 5:00am EST.
There are exceptions to this as some campaigns start much later in the day, for example at 3:00pm EST on August 5, 2020.
Emotet campaigns can typically be seen Monday through Friday, and there is no significant sending on weekends.
There are some exceptions to this as the actor did not send malicious email on Friday, July 24, Monday, August 3, Tuesday, August 4, or during the period of July 17, 2020 to August 18, 2020.
TA542 continues to leverage social engineering mechanisms to increase infection rates.
They compose emails in the appropriate language for the targeted country.
They use simple “call to action” emails.
A large percentage of Emotet emails use thread hijacking (replies to previous conversations), and the subjects begin with “Re: ” or “RE: “, such as:
Another noticeable trend is using the recipient’s name, job function, company name, or company domain in the subject.
The Friendly-From name of the sender address often contains the company name or domain.
The email body also often contains the company name, domain or recipient name in the greeting and signature.
INVOICE 1067935 from John Doe
Table 1: Example subjects that use specific information related to recipient or their company
Besides those notable trends, there is a large and varying number of subjects.
Below are a few examples of other subjects, though this list is not exhaustive:
TA542 continues the trend of consistently targeting certain regions, while also adding new countries periodically.
The core regions that Emotet still targets include (listed by message volume): Germany, Austria, Switzerland, United States, United Kingdom, Japan, and Latin American countries.
Other regions targeted recently but less consistently include Indonesia, the Philippines, Sweden, and India.
Each country is typically targeted with appropriate language in email bodies, subjects, filenames, and branding.
Known targeted countries are listed below (Table 2).
Consistent targeting of countries such as Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador
Table 2: Description of the countries with observed Emotet email campaigns since July 17, 2020.
Note that this list is not considered exhaustive.
There are often mistakes in the way that Emotet malicious emails are created, where placeholders or macros are not filled in.
These may be due to bugs in the code of the Emotet mail sending capability that generates these emails.
For example, we have seen attachments with names such as those listed below.
Placeholders like “{rcpt.domain}” are meant to be completed in the domain.
There are also placeholders in the email body such as those shown below.
A Spanish language email screenshot in Figure 3 illustrates this.
This section highlights email lures from some of the more notable TA542 campaigns.
The figure below shows the following emails:
Figure 2: Clockwise, starting from top left corner, Indonesian, Hindi, Filipino, Swedish language emails.
The figure below shows the following emails:
Figure 3: Clockwise, starting from top left corner, German, Spanish, Italian, French language emails.
The figure below shows the following emails:
Figure 4: COVID-19 email example, Japanese Bitcoin extortion email.
We confirmed open source reports that there are examples of Emotet emails that include benign attachments along with malicious ones.
These make up a minor portion of Emotet email.
Examples below show benign PDF attachments along with malicious Word attachments.
Figure 5: benign PDF attachments in the same email with malicious Word attachments.
The malicious content included in the emails sent by this threat actor is either a URL or an attachment, and sometimes but rarely both a URL and an attachment in the same email.
Word attachments are seen every day, URLs linking to Word files are also seen every day, and PDFs attachments are seen occasionally.
Demonstrated for the period of July 17, 2020 to August 18, 2020:
2020-07-20: Word attachments, PDF attachments, URLs
2020-07-21: Word attachments, PDF attachments, URLs
2020-07-23: Word attachments, PDF attachments, URLs
2020-07-27: Word attachments, PDF attachments, URLs
2020-07-28: Word attachments, PDF attachments, URLs
Most often an attachment is a Word document with macros, and less commonly a PDF.
Other attachment types that the actor is known to use, specifically JScript or Zips, have not been observed since Emotet returned.
The Word attachments are first-stage downloaders that attempt to download the Emotet payload using macros from one of several (typically 5) hardcoded payload URLs.
A new set of five payload URLs is seen periodically, as frequently as every 1 to 2 hours.
Different documents may use the same set of 5 URLs.
On any given day we observe up to 100 total payload URLs.
Note: On August 18, 2020 we started observing Word files with 6 or 7 payload URLs.
The PDF attachments contain an embedded URL linking to a site hosting a similar macro Word document.
Figure 6: TA542 most commonly uses Microsoft Word documents with macros.
The actor periodically updates the visual lure used in the document.
This collage shows two of the observed lures.
Figure 7: Examples of PDF attachments observed.
Emotet has a small library of templates for their PDF file names:
[2 letters]-[4 digits] report p[1 number].pdf
soc report 07 21 2020.pdf
[date]- balance & payment report.pdf
2020_07- balance & payment report.pdf
Table 3: PDF file names and format
Conversely, they have a large and varying library of file name templates that they use for the Word documents, below examples represent a small fraction of possibilities.
Word attachment names are not always English–they may be in a language appropriate to the targeted geography.
[5 digits] logistics rate con.doc
[date]- balance & payment report.doc
2020_07- balance & payment report.doc
form - aug 11, 2020.doc
payment summary - ref id- d[5 digits].doc
payment summary - ref id- d28114.doc
Table 4: Examples of Word document file names
File names that stood out: On August 7, Proofpoint saw attachment filenames that included “COVID-19” strings, such as “cd-8423 medical report covid-19.doc” and “covid-19 report 08 11 2020.doc”.
These names are still in use at the time of writing.
Extension mismatches: Some emails have attachment file names with a .docm, .rtf, or .zip extension, where they should be .doc extensions.
This may be accidental or a deliberate attempt to evade detection.
We did not do thorough testing, but we know that Microsoft Word can open some of these attachments without errors despite the mismatch.
For example, Word 2010 can open the files with .rtf extension.
Figure 8: Example emails showing the extension mismatch
We have not observed changes in the way that this actor embeds URLs in emails.
The URLs are still frequently hosted on compromised sites, including vulnerable WordPress installations.
The URLs hosted on compromised WordPress CMS sites are obvious to spot as they are often hosted with “wp-content”, “wp-admin”, “wp-includes” and other similar folder structure.
For other URLs it is not immediately obvious how the actor compromised the sites since there are a range of servers (i.e.
Apache, nginx, IIS), databases (i.e.
PHP), libraries, plugins, eCommerce frameworks, etc.
The actor typically adds a nested structure of one or more folders on the compromised site and hosts a malicious PHP script that initiates the download of the payload.
Currently we only observe URLs leading to Microsoft Word documents with macros.
We have not done extensive comparative reverse engineering and review of Emotet and its modules, but components that we analyzed had very little change.
Emotet still uses the same way to store configuration and the same network command and control protocol.
We confirmed open source reports of a change in Emotet mail sending module now attaching benign attachments along with malicious attachments.
Qbot affiliate id “partner01” is the primary payload dropped by Emotet seen almost daily.
However, Emotet has previously delivered Qbot affiliate “hhhXX” on a few occasions such as in March 2019, January 2019, May 2017, and April 2017.
Before Emotet disappeared from the landscape, it primarily delivered The Trick affiliate “morXX” in January and February 2020.
Example Qbot “partner01” sha256 hashes observed between July 17 and August 18:

Example Qbot configuration for the “7ca48480ca645ee2b83bf707893e84115f87ea6e327f369e40c4ab0afc8abe7a” sample:
Since returning from an extended vacation, TA542 email campaigns are once again the most prevalent by message volume by a large margin, with only a few other actors coming close.
They have introduced code changes to their malware, such as updates to the email sending module, and picked up a new affiliate payload to distribute (Qbot).
They continue to experiment with delivery to new countries.
Despite these changes we also noted that many of their other methods and tooling have remained relatively unchanged from previous activity since their return.
Current lures, delivery mechanisms, and widespread geographic targeting are all similar to what we have observed in the past.
Whether they iterate and change their tactics or continue in the same manner, Emotet remains a highly dangerous threat.
Emerging Threats + Emerging Threats Pro Signature
2842317 - ETPRO MALWARE Win32/Emotet CnC Activity (POST) M9
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
