Defend against threats, ensure business continuity, and implement email policies.
Protect against email, mobile, social and desktop threats.
Engage your users and turn them into a strong line of defense against phishing and other cyber attacks.
Defend against cyber criminals accessing your sensitive data and trusted accounts.
Reduce risk, control costs and improve data visibility to ensure compliance.
Protect from data loss by negligent, compromised, and malicious users.
Protect against digital security risks across web domains, social media and the deep and dark web.
Get deeper insight with on-call, personalized assistance from our expert team.
  Get real-time insight into threats that can cause data loss and brand damage.
Protect your people from email and cloud threats with an intelligent and holistic approach
Help your employees identify, resist and report attacks before the damage is done
Prevent data loss via negligent, compromised and malicious insiders by correlating content, behavior and threats
Manage risk and data retention needs with a modern compliance and archiving solution
Keep your people and their cloud apps secure by eliminating threats, avoiding data loss and mitigating compliance risk
Implement the very best security and compliance solution for your Microsoft 365 collaboration suite
Secure access to corporate resources and ensure business continuity for your remote workers
Deliver Proofpoint solutions to your customers and grow your business.
Learn about the benefits of becoming a Proofpoint Extraction Partner.
Learn about our global consulting and services partners that deliver fully managed and integrated solutions.
Learn about our relationships with industry-leading firms to help protect your people, data and brand.
Learn about the technology and alliance partners in our Social Media Protection Partner program.
Small Business Solutions for channel partners and MSPs.
Find the information you're looking for in our library of videos, data sheets, white papers and more.
Keep up with the latest news and happenings in the ever‑evolving cybersecurity landscape.
Learn about the human side of cybersecurity.
Episodes feature insights from experts and executives.
Learn about the latest security threats and how to protect your people, data, and brand.
Connect with us at events to learn how to protect your people and data from ever‑evolving threats.
Read how Proofpoint customers around the globe solve their most pressing cybersecurity challenges.
Browse our webinar library to learn about the latest threats, trends and issues in cybersecurity.
Learn about our threat operations center and read about the latest risks in our threat blog and reports.
Proofpoint is a leading cybersecurity company that protects organizations' greatest assets and biggest risks: their people.
Today’s cyber attacks target people.
Learn about our unique people-centric approach to protection.
Stand out and make a difference at one of the world's leading cybersecurity companies.
Read the latest press releases, news stories and media highlights about Proofpoint.
Access the full range of Proofpoint support services.
Since August 2020, Proofpoint researchers have tracked extremely high-volume Amazon Japan credential and information phishing campaigns, with suspected activity dating back to June 2020.
The messages pose as Amazon Japan, suggesting that the recipient needs to review their account for "confirmation of ownership" or "updated payment information".
Upon clicking a link in the message, the recipient is taken to one of several variations of Amazon-themed credential phishing landing pages that collect credentials, personally identifiable information (PII), and credit card numbers.
Messages have been sent both to Japan-based organizations and those with a presence in Japan.
The pages are geofenced to ensure that only Japan-based recipients are taken to the credential phishing page.
While popular brands like Amazon are often abused in credential phishing campaigns, the volume of messages sets these campaigns apart from other Amazon-branded activity.
The campaigns run continuously, sending hundreds of thousands of messages each day.
As of mid-October, sometimes more than a million messages are seen in a single day, rivaling Emotet message volume.
The messages are well-crafted Japanese language lures with subjects suggesting that the recipient's information needs an update or that their account has been locked:
Amazon.co.jp アカウント所有権の証明（名前、その他個人情報）の確認 ("Confirmation of proof of ownership of Amazon.co.jp account (name and other personal information)") (Figure 1)
お支払い方法の情報を更新 ("Updated payment method information") (Figure 2)
アカウントがロックされたので、ご注意下さい ("Please note that your account has been locked") (Figure 3)
Figure 1: Lure with subject, “Confirmation of proof of ownership of Amazon.co.jp account (name and other personal information)”
Figure 2: Lure with subject, “Updated payment method information”
Figure 3: Lure with subject, “Please note your account has been locked”
Images in the messages, such as the Amazon logos, are hotlinked from free image hosting services, and the same image URLs have been observed across multiple campaigns.
The messages purport to be from Amazon, though they come from email addresses that initially were not disguised particularly well, such as these samples:
By early October 2020, we began to see a shift in effort to make the from address appear somewhat legitimate:
In examining the message URLs, we see that they contain parameters for OpenID (Figure 4), the authentication protocol used by Amazon Japan.
These URLs don’t appear to take the user to an OpenID implementation, but the parameters in the URL string exist to provide legitimacy to the experience.
We identified what appear to be placeholder values in some URLs, suggesting perhaps some messages were prematurely sent, or that the corresponding values weren’t available (Figure 4).
Figure 4: URL with BRECEIVER_ADDRESS and BRAND_TEXT variables
We also identified use of what appears to be a placeholder email address in some URLs, “a@b.c” (Figure 5).
In other URLs observed, the recipient email address populates this parameter.
Figure 5: URL with a@b.c and an OpenID path in place of variables
When clicked, the geofenced links in the message take the user either to a spoofed Amazon Japan login page (Figure 6), or if the user appears to be outside of Japan, to the actual Amazon Japan login page.
Figure 6: Spoofed Amazon Japan login page
Upon “logging in” with their Amazon username and password, the user is taken to a form that collects various pieces of PII, such as address, birthday, and phone number (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Information phishing landing page, requesting the user’s country, name, birthday, zip/postal code, prefecture (state), street address, business name (optional), and phone number
The form also collects credit card numbers, which are loosely validated through a script hosted on the same site, and zip codes, which are validated via an API call to a third-party service (Figures 8, 9).
Interestingly, the zip code we provided does not appear to be a legitimate Japanese zip code, though no errors were returned upon submitting the information.
Figure 8: Error indicating the credit card number originally provided (a random numeric string of the wrong length) is invalid
Figure 9: Intercepted traffic illustrating the call to ”zipcloud.ibsnet[.
]co.jp” for zip code validation, as well as calls to ”/ap/actions/validate?cxdi=” for credit card number validation
After submitting valid information, users are thanked for updating their information, told they may now access their account, and redirected to the real Amazon Japan site at amazon.co[.
Figure 10: Post-submission page informing users that they may now access their account
Figure 11: Message volume, August 2020 through October to date
Proofpoint has tracked these messages since mid-August, but we have identified activity as early as June 2020 that appears to be tied to the same actor.
While the messages are in Japanese and the landing pages geofenced to Japanese IPs, there is no clear pattern among recipients or industries, beyond being based in Japan or having business presence in Japan.
Given the loosely linear trajectory of daily message volume observed through late August and September, volume could continue to increase over the coming months.
Typically, the credential phishing landing page is an IP address, followed by “/ap/signin”:
Less often, a domain is used in lieu of an IP address:
Hundreds of IP addresses have been used across multiple campaigns, as the actor tends to adopt new IP addresses for each campaign, rather than reuse IP addresses.
IP addresses belong to a variety of autonomous systems, with no clear pattern among geographies or providers.
Figure 12: Top AS names for IP addresses used in lures from August 2020 through October to date
The domains used are *.xyz or *.cn TLDs, and some have been observed across multiple campaigns.
The .xyz domains are registered through GoDaddy, while the *.cn domains has a sponsoring registrar of 阿里云计算有限公司（万网） (Alibaba Cloud Computing).
August 30-September 5 Campaign Landing Page Domains
Registrant State/Province: Xiang Gang 
			Registrant Country: CN
Registrant State/Province: Xiang Gang 
			Registrant Country: CN
Registrant State/Province: Xiang Gang 
			Registrant Country: CN
Registrant State/Province: Xiang Gang 
			Registrant Country: CN
While much of the registrant data for these domains was redacted at the time we checked, we did notice commonalities across ‘Creation Date’ and several of the registrant detail fields.
September 6-12 Campaign Landing Page Domains
Registrant State/Province: Xiang Gang 
			Registrant Country: CN
Registrant: 王帅国 
			Registrant Contact Email: rxbnn3[@]163[.
Registrant: 王帅国 
			Registrant Contact Email: rxbnn3[@]163[.
Registrant: 王帅国 
			Registrant Contact Email: rxbnn3[@]163[.
Registrant: 王帅国 
			Registrant Contact Email: rxbnn3[@]163[.
]xyz, reused from the August 30-September 5 campaign, the domains for the September 6-12 campaign share common traits.
Like the previous set of domains, the creation dates and registrant information suggest that they may be related in some way.
]com” is a prolific domain registrant, as this address appears as a registrant contact across 251 domains as of this publication.
In addition to the domains associated with rxbnn3[@]163[.
]com shown above, the email is also linked to a number of domain generation algorithm-like domains:
The Amazon brand is commonly spoofed by threat actors seeking credentials, but the volume and persistence of these campaigns set them apart from other Amazon-themed activity.
The consistent reuse of message assets, landing pages, and steadily increasing message volume suggest that this activity could be driven by a botnet.
Moreover, there is no apparent weekend lull in message volume, as we sometimes observe with less automated operations.
If this is indeed powered by a botnet, it’s unlikely that message volume will decrease soon.
Threat actors often make incremental changes to their operations, and elements like different branding or collection of slightly different information could be easy pivot points for this actor over the coming months.
Update 30 June 2021: Proofpoint is still tracking this activity however it is no longer using geofencing techniques.
Subscribe to the Proofpoint Blog
Terms and conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
