The coordinated efforts of authorities are bearing fruit as more criminal networks are taken offline.
Only time will tell if the operators are able to recover from this.
Our Digital Forensics & Incident Response (DFIR) team have first-hand experience of the severity of the malware, having carried out multiple incident response engagements involving Emotet, followed by TrickBot, which then provides access for other threat actors operating ransomware such as Ryuk.
The remediation activities undertaken to contain and mitigate the threats, is often intense and comprehensive in nature, due to the advanced capabilities of the malware and the sophisticated techniques utilized to propagate it across an enterprise network.
In recent months our threat researchers observed a resurgence of Emotet.
The malware is polymorphic in nature and often difficult to detect and contain, due to the signatures consistently changing for different payloads.
Spearphishing is the primary attack vector, used to entice victims to extract a password protected archive file (.zip) and access a word document (.doc).
Often the email content contains information previously harvested from email threads, appearing to align to legitimate organizational communication.
Once the word document is accessed, embedded macros use Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) to launch a sub-process of WmiPrvSe.exe, which is hidden obfuscated PowerShell code, aimed at dropping the Emotet payload onto the host via HTTP (port 80) GET requests.
The malicious code depicted is typically a base-64 encoded string, unicode (UTF16-LE) and also contains ‘+’ characters used to concatenate the strings.
Once fully decoded, the code contains readable strings, which instructs the operating system to attempt to connection to the web address delivery URLs, used to drop the Emotet payload into folder directories in temporary locations, such as %AppData%\Local\ and %AppData%\Roaming\.
Once the payload is created in the file system, it’s executed via rundll32.exe.
Emotet wastes no time in executing functions via legitimate Windows services and subsequently carries out process injection, in an attempt to avoid detection.
The malware carries out preliminary discovery activities in order to gather intelligence from the infiltrated host, using legitimate living off the land (LOLbins) tools such as net.exe and ipconfig.exe.
Persistence is established via common methods such as the Windows registry autorun key.
Credentials are often exfiltrated via HTTP (port 80) POST requests to C2 infrastructure6  under the control of the threat actor.
Emotet aims to penetrate the network further, typically via cracked credentials and exploiting vulnerable server message block (SMB) protocols (port 445), while facilitating access to additional threat actors in parallel.
It’s imperative organizations remain cautious, because despite the proactive operations taking down critical infrastructure, the aforementioned malware distributed by Emotet remains active and additional threat actors may still remain within your network, utilizing other C2 infrastructure.
Security researchers will now monitor the effect of the takedown action on the flow of malicious traffic, but nonetheless this is a significant landmark in the fight against one of the most dangerous malware of recent times.
Organizations should ensure their email security is correctly configured as a first line of defense and, in addition, employees should be educated on current threats.
Furthermore, security technologies focused on endpoint threat detection must be properly configured and feedback acted on, if alerts present themselves.
Commodity malware should be cleaned up as a priority, preventing more sinister threats from materializing.
To assist with threat hunting missions, the following tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) were observed, not only during the most recent Emotet malspam campaign, but also during recent ongoing incident response engagements.
Copyright © 2019 NTT Limited
